I 

THE 

HISTORY 

••"i"""^. 

r 

OE 


COUNT    ZOSIMUS, 


SOMETIME 


ADVOCATE  AND  CHANCELLOR 


OF  THE 


IXomau 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  GREEK, 

\ 

WITH  THE  NOTES  OF  THE  OXFORD  EDITION. 


COMPLETE  IN  ONE  VOLUME. 


WJ*- 


. 

Uontron: 

PRINTED     FOR   J.    DAVIS,    ESSEX-STREET,   STRAND;     AND   TO 

BE    HAD    OF    ALL    THE    BOOKSELLERS, 
BY    AY,   CBEEN    AJiD    T.    CHAPLIN,   CRANE-COURT,   FLEET-STREET. 

1814. 


' 


.I^YRY 

AF: 


G.  J.  VOSSIUS 

CONCERNING    THE  AUTHOR. 


THE  language  of  Zosimus,  according  to  the  judg- 
ment of  Photius,  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  in 
his  BIBLIOTHECA,  is  concise,  expressive,  pure,  and 
sweet ;  but,  being  a  Heathen,  he  often  reproaches 
the  Christian  Princes,  and  is  upon  that  account  re- 
prehended by  the  same  Photius,  by  Evagrius,  Ni- 
cephorus,  and  others :  it  is,  however,  the  opinion  of 
Leunclavius,  that  Zosimus  ought  to  be  believed 
even  in  those  relations,  there  being  no  doubt  that 
the  Christian  Princes  were  guilty  of  many  enormi-^ 
ties,  which  could  not  be  passed  over  by  the  faith- 
ful Historian. 


THE 

HISTORY  OF  COUNT  ZOSIMU& 

BOOK  THE  FIRST. 


WHEN"  Polybius  of  Megalopolis  proposed  to  write  the 
history  of  all  the  remarkable  occurrences  of  his  own  times,  he 
thought  it  proper  to  demonstrate  by  facts,  that  the  Romans,  who 
were  continually  at  war  with  the  neighbouring  states,  for  six 
hundred  years  after  the  building  of  their  city,  acquired  in  that 
space  of  time  no  considerable  extent  of  dominion.  But  after 
they  had  subdued  a  small  part  of  Italy,  which  upon  the  invasion 
of  Hannibal  they  lost  at  the  battle  of  Cannx,  and  viewed  their 
enemies  under  their  own  walls;  they  made  so  great  a  progress  in 
good  fortune,  that  in  less  than  fifty-three  years,  they  became 
masters,  not  only  of  all  Italy  and  Africa,  but  likewise  of  Spain. 
And  being  still  desirous  to  enlarge  their  empire,  they  crdssed  the 
Ionian  sea,  conquered  Greece,  and  ruined  the  Macedonians, 
whose  king  they  carried  to  Rome  in  chains.  No  person  can  there- 
fore suppose  that  all  this  proceeded  from  causes  merely  human, 
but  either  from  fatal  necessity,  the  influence  of  the  planets,  or  the 
will  of  the  Deity,  which  regards  with  favour  all  our  actions, 
while  they  are  just  and  virtuous.  For  these  provide  for  future 
contingencies  by  such  a  train  of  apparent  causes,  that  thinking- 
persons  must  conclude  the  administration  of  human  affairs  to  be 
in  the  hands  of  a  divine  Providence;  so  that  when  the  energy  of 
nations  by  the  divine  influence  is  roused  and  alert,  they  flourish 
in  prosperity;  and  on  the  contrary,  when  they  become  dis- 
pleasing to  the  gods,  their  affairs  decline  to  a  state  resembling 
that  which  now  exists. 

But  it  being  my  design  to  demonstrate  by  actual  circumstances 
the  truth  of  my  observations,  1  shall  begin  by  stating,  that  from 
the  Trojan  war  to  the  battle  of  Marathon  the  Greeks  performed 
no  exploits  worthy  of  being  mentioned  either  against  each  other 
or  any  foreign  power.  But  when  Darius  with  his  prefects  brought 
against  them  an  army  of  immense  magnitude,  eight  thousand 
Athenians,  as  if  inspired  from  Heaven,  and  armed  by  mere  chance, 
advanced  to  oppose  him,  and  met  with  such  success  as  to  kill 
ninety  thousand,  and  compel  the  remainder  to  fly  from  their 
country.  And  it  was  this  engagement  that  enabled  the  Greeks 


,6  THE  HISTORY.  BOOK  r. 

to  improve  their  condition.  But  Xerxes,  after  the  death  of 
Darius,  invaded  Greece  with  a  force  so  much  more  considerable, 
that  he  appeared  to  carry  all  Asia  along  with  him  into  Greece; 
for  the  sea  was  covered  with  his  ships,  and  the  land"  with  his 
soldiers.  Finding  it  necessary  to  cross  from  Asia  into  Europe,  he 
constructed  a  bridge  over  the  Hellespont  for  the  passage  of  his 
foot  soldiers,  and,  as  if  the  two  elements  of  earth  and  water 
were  not  capable  of  receiving  his  army  without  depriving  them 
of  their  natural  use,  cut  a  channel  through  Mount  Athos,  in 
which  his  ships  rode  as  in  the  sea.  In  the  mean  time  th6 
Greeks,  though  terrified  at  the  bare  report  of  the  approach  of 
such  an  enemy,  prepared  to  oppose  him  with  their  utmost 
strength.  In  a  naval  engagement  at  Artemisium,  and  another  at 
Salamis,  they  so  far  exceeded  their  former  victory,  that  Xerxes 
was  glad  to  escape  with  life,  having  lost  the  greatest  part  of  his 
army;  and  the  destruction  of  the  remainder  of  them  at  Plateae 
gave  such  a  completion  to  the  renown  of  the  Greeks,  that,  by  the 
force  of  the  reputation  they  had  acquired,  they  not  only  liberated 
the  Greeks  that  were  settled  in  Asia,  but  possessed  themselves 
of  almost  all  the  islands. 

And  indeed,  had  they  continued  amicable  with  each  other,  and 
contented  with  the  condition  they  then  stood  in,  and  had  the 
Athenians  and  Lacedemonians  not  quarrelled  for  the  government 
of  Greece,  they  would  never  have  had  to  submit  to  any  foreign 
power.  But  the  strength  of  Greece  being  exhausted  by  the 
Peloponnesian  war,  and  its  cities  impoverished,  Philip  found 
opportunity  to  enlarge  the  kingdom  left  him  by  his  father,  by  arts 
and  stratagems,  though  in  strength  inferior  to  all  his  neighbours. 
For  by  his  money  he  so  bound  to  him  his  own  soldiers,  and  all 
others  that  would  fight  under  his  banners,  that  he  became  suffici- 
'ently  powerful  to  contend  with  the  Athenians  at  Cheronea,  and 
after  that  victory  by  his  courtesy  and  affability  insinuated  himself 
so  much  into  the  regard  of  all,  that  he  thought  himself  able  to 
march  against  the  king  of  Persia,  but  died  before  he  could  levy 
a  competent  force. 

Alexander,  who  succeeded  to  the  throne,  having  settled  the  af- 
fairs Greece,  crossed  into  Asia  with  a  considerable  army.  Having 
there  conquered  the  Satrapes  who  opposed  him,  he  advanced 
towards  Darius  himself,  who  had  fixed  himself  with  an  innu- 
merable host  in  all  the  places  near  to  Issus.  There  he  gained  in 
an  engagement  with  the  Persians  an  incredible  victory,  routed 
Darius,  and  proceeded  through  Phoenicia  and  Syria  into  Palestine, 
His  actions  at  Tyre  and  Gaza  may  be  be  read  in  the  historians 


HOOK    t. 


OF  ZOSIMTJS. 


of  his  life.  From  thence  he  marched  into  Egypt,  and  having 
paid  his  devotions  to  Jupiter  Ammon,  and  ordered  Alexandria  to 
be  erected,  he  returned  to  finish  the  Persian  war.  On  his  march, 
finding  that  he  was  esteemed  by  all  people,  he  proceeded  into 
Mesopotamia;  and  though  he  heard  that  Darius  was  prepared 
to  receive  him  with  a  greater  army  than  before,  yet  he  advanced 
with  the  force  he  then  had,  and  engaged  at  Arbela;  where  he 
gained  so  important  a  victory,  as  to  destroy  all  the  troops  of 
Darius,  and  overturn  the  Persian  monarchy,  although  the  king 
himself  escaped,  Darius  being  murdered  by  Bessus,  Alexander, 
after  performing  great  achievements  in  India,  returned  to  Babylon, 
where  he  died.  After  his  decease,  the  dominion  of  the  Mace- 
donians being  divided  into  several  principalities,  which  were 
enfeebled  by  continual  wars  against  each  other,  the  remaining 
part  of  Europe  was  subdued  by  the  Romans.  Crossing  after- 
wards into  Asia,  they  contended  with  the  king  of  Pont  us  and 
Antiochus,  then  with  the  Dynastes  or  sovereigns  of  Egypt ;  thua 
enlarging  their  empire  every  year,  so  long  as  their  senate  re-> 
tained  its  authority,  because  their  consuls  were  ambitious  of 
emulating  each  other.  But  the  commonwealth  being  ruined  by 
the  civil  wars  between  Sylla  and  Marius,  and  between  Julius 
Caesar  and  Pompey,  the  aristocracy,  or  government  of  the  nobles, 
was  set  aside,  and  Octavianus  chosen  dictator.  The  entire  admi- 
nistration of  affairs  was  thus  committed  to  him  alone,  without 
the  consideration,  that  it  was  like  throwing  the  hopes  and  inte- 
rests of  all  the  people  on  the  hazard  of  a  die,  and  placing  that  vast 
empire  at  the  risk  of  the  inclination  and  authority  of  a  single  ruler. 
For  were  it  the  inclination  of  such  a  ruler  to  govern  according  to 
justice  and  moderation,  he  could  not  hope  to  give  satisfaction  tq 
all,  not  being  able  to  protect  such  as  were  at  a  considerable  dis? 
tance  in  any  convenient  time,  nor  to  select  so  many  officers,  that 
would  fear  the  disgrace  of  not  performing  their  duty;  nor  could 
he  suit  his  own  disposition  to  the  different  humours  of  so  many. 
JSut  if  he  should  wish  to  break  through  the  bonds  of  imperial  and 
regal  government,  and  exercise  absolute  tyranny,  by  subverting 
the  existing  establishments,  conniving  at  great  crimes,  selling  of 
justice,  and  regarding  his  subjects  as  slaves  (as  most,  and  indeed 
with  a  few  exceptions,  almost  all  the  emperors  have  done),  it  must 
of  necessity  follow,  that  his  unbounded  savage  authority  would 
prove  a  common  calamity.  It  is  the  very  nature  of  such  a  des- 
potism, that  fawning  miscreants  and  parasites  are  preferred  to  si- 
tuations of  the  greatest  trust,  whilst  modest  quiet  men,  who  are 
averse  to  so  base  a  manner  of  living,  resent  with  justice  that 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  i. 


they  themselves  cannot  enjoy  similar  benefits.  Hence  cities 
are  filled  with  sedition  and  tumult;  for  when  all  offices,  both 
civil  and  military,  are  conferred  upon  ill  disposed  magistrates,  it 
both  renders  the  citizens  restless  in  peace,  and  discourages  the 
soldiers  in  war. 

That  this  is  the  case  has  been  plainly  shewn  by  experience,  and 
the  train  of  events  that  took  place  soon  afterwards,  in  the  reign  of 
Octavianus.  For  the  dance  called  Pantomimus,  which  signifies  a 
dance  in  imitation  of  every  one,  was  introduced  into  Rome  at  that 
period  ;  it  never  having  before  been  in  use  in  Italy,  being  invented 
by  Pylades  and  Bathyllus;  besides  many  Bother  innovations,  that 
still  are  productive  of  great  evil.  Octavianus  however  appears  to 
have  ruled  with  greatmoderation,  more  particularly  after  he  listened 
to  the  counsel  of  Athenodorus  the  stoic,  and  when  compared  to 
Tiberius  his  successor.  The  tyranny  of  the  latter  was  so  severe 
as  to  be  intolerable  to  his  subjects,  who  expelled  him  to  an  island, 
where  he  secreted  himself  for  some  time  and  then  died.  To 
him  succeeded  Caius  Caligula,  who  far  exceeded  Tiberius  in 
every  species  of  wickedness,  and  was  slain  by  Chaereas,  who  re- 
solved by  that  bold  action  to  deliver  the  state  from  his  cruel 
tyranny.  The  next  emperor  was  Claudius,  who  intrusted  the 
management  of  all  his  affairs  to  Libertini  (the  sons  of  those 
who  had  been  slaves)  that  were  eunuchs,  and  his  end  was  dis- 
graceful. Nero  and  his  successors  were  then  raised  to  the  im- 
perial throne.  Of  whom  I  shall  not  state  any  thing,  in  order 
that  the  world  may  not  be  pained  by  the  repetition  of  the  im- 
pious and  monstrous  enormities  of  which  they  were  guilty. 
But  Vespasian,  and  Titus  his  son,  acted  during  their  reigns  with 
greater  moderation.  On  the  contrary,  Domitian  exceeded  all  his 
predecessors  in  cruelty,  luxury,  and  avarice;  for  which  reason, 
after  he  had  for  fifteen  successive  years  tormented  the  common- 
wealth, he  was  put  to  death  by  Stephanus,  one  of  his  freedmen  ; 
thus  receiving  the  punishment  which  his  actions  merited.. 

After  him  several  worthy  sovereigns  succeeded  to  the  empire: 
Nerva,  Trajan,  and  afterwards  Adrian,  Antoninus  Pius,  and  the 
brothers  Verus  and  Lucius,  who  reformed  many  abuses  in  the 
atate,  and  not  only  recovered  what  their  predecessors  had  lost, 
but  made  likewise  some  new  additions.  But  Commodus,  the 
son  of  Marcus,  on  becoming  emperor,  addicted  himself  not  only 
to  tyranny,  but  to  other  monstrous  vices,  until  his  concubine 
Marcia  assumed  the  courage  of  a  man  and  put  him  to  death,  and 
the  empire  was  conferred  on  Pertinax.  But  the  imperial  guarda 
being  unable  to  submit  to  the  strictness  of  his  discipline*  which 


BOOK  i<  OF  ZOSIMUS,  0 

caused  them  to  mutiny  and  to  murder  him,  Rome  was  on  the 
point  of  becoming  a  seat  of  anarchy  and  disorder,  while  the  pre- 
torian  soldiers,  who  were  intended  for  the  protection  of  the  palace, 
attempted  to  deprive  the  senate  of  the  power  of  appointing  a  sole 
ruler.  And  the  empire  being  now  put  up  as  it-  were  to  sale, 
Didius  Julianus,  at  the  instigation  of  his  wife,  assisted  by  his  own 
foliy,  produced  a  sum  of  money  with  which  he  purchased  the 
empire  ;  and  exhibited  such  a  spectacle  as  the  people  had  never 
before  witnessed.  The  soldiers  who  raised  him  to  the  dignity, 
by  violence  put  him  in  possession  of  the  palace  and  all  that  it 
contained.  But  he  was  called  to  account  and  deprived  of  life  by 
the  very  men  who  were  the  means  of  his  exaltation,  nor  was  his 
life  more  than  a  momentary  golden  dream. 

At  his  removal,  the  Senate  consulted  whom  to  elect  Emperor, 
and  fixed  on  Severus.  But  Albinus  and  Niger  pretending  a  right 
to  the  throne  at  the  same  time,  a  furious  civil  war  broke  out  be- 
tween the  competitors;  the  cities  being  divided  between  the  dif- 
ferent parties.  On  this  great  commotions  were  excited  in  Egypt 
and  the  eastern  parts  of  the  empire,  and  the  Byzantines,  who  es- 
poused the  cause  of  Niger,  and  entertained  him,  were  ready  for 
the  most  dangerous  enterprises,  until  he  was  vanquished  by  Seve- 
rus and  killed.  After  him  Albinus  lik-ewise  took  leave  of  the 
empire  and  the  world  together,  and  thus  the  sole  power  now  de- 
volved on  Severus.  He  therefore  applied  himself  to  the  correction 
of  the  enormities  that  had  sprung  up,  punishing  severely  the  sol- 
diers that  had  murdered  Pertinax,  and  delivered  the  empire  to 
Julianus.  Having  done  this,  and  regulated  the  army,  he  marched 
against  the  Persians,  and  in  this  expedition  took  Ctesiphon  and 
Babylon,  over-ran  the  Arabians,  called  Scenites  from  their  dwel- 
ling in  tents,  conquered  the  principal  part  of  Arabia,  and  per- 
formed many  other  great  achievments.  He  was  besides  inexorable 
to  delinquents,  and  made  public  distribution  of  the  property  of 
those  who  were  guilty  of  any  heinous  offence. 

Having  adorned  many  cities  with  sumptuous  edifices,  he  de- 
clared his  son  Antoninus  emperor,  but  at  his  death  left  his  other 
son  Geta  co-heir  with  him  in  the  government,  appointing  for  their 
guardian  Papinianus,  a  person  eminent  for  his  strict  justice,  and 
for  his  ability  in  the  knowledge  and  interpretation  of  the  law,  in 
\vhich  he  excelled  every  Roman  either  before  or  since  his  time. 
But  this  worthy  man  in  a  short  time  became  odious  to  Antoninus, 
because  he  used  his. utmost  endeavours  to  frustrate  a  design  which 
he  had  discovered,  fofmed  by  Antoninus  against  his  brother  Geta. 
He  resolved  therefore  to  remove  this  obstacle,  and  concerted  with 

VOL.    J.    NO.  1.  '    '     B 


'10 THE  HISTORY  BOOK  t 

the  soldiers  the  destruction  of  Papinianus.  This  being  effected, 
*nd  his  hands  at  liberty,  he  slew  his  brother,  whom  his  own 
mother  could  not  save,  though  he  fled  to  her  for  protection. 

But  not  long  after  Antoninus  was  remunerated  for  the  murder 
of  his  brother,  and  it  was  never  known  who  was  the  person  that 
killed  him.  The  soldiers  at  Rome  then  chose  for  emperor  Ma- 
crinus,  the  prefect  of  the  court ;  while  those  in  the  east  set  up 
Emisenus,  who  was  related  to  the  mother  of  Antoninus.  Each- 
army  was  now  so  tenacious  of  its  choice,  that  a  civil  disturbance- 
arose  between  them,  and  while  the  supporters  of  Emisenus  An- 
toninus were  bringing  him  to  Rome,  those  of  Macrinus  advanced 
from  Italy.  The  two  armies  engaging  at  Antioch  in  Syria,  Ma- 
crinus was  so  completely  routed,  that  he  was  compelled  to  fly 
from  the  camp,  and  was  taken  and  put  to  death  between  Byzan- 
tium and  Chalcedon. 

Antoninus,  after  this  victory,  punished  all  that  had  espoused  th» 
cause  of  Macrinus  as  enemies,  and  led  so  dissolute  and  shameful 
ft  life,  and  held  such  frequent  communication  with  magicians  and 
jugglers,  that  the  Romans,  unable  to  endure  his  excessive  luxury, 
murdered  him,  tore  his  body  in  pieces,  and  proclaimed  Alexandep 
emperor,  who  likewise  was  of  the  family  of  Severus.  He,  though 
very  young,  gave  such  signs  of  a  good  disposition,  as  inspired  th& 
people  with  hope  that  he  would  prove  a  mild  ruler.  He  made 
Flavianus  and  Chrestus  prefects  of  his  court,  men  not  only  well 
acquainted  with  military  affairs,  but  excelling  in  the  manage- 
ment of  civil  business.  ButMamaea,  the  emperor's  mother,  placed 
over  them  Ulpianus,  as  an  inspector  of  their  conduct,  and  indeed 
as  a  partner  in  their  office,  he  being  an  excellent  lawyer,  and 
knowing  not  only  how  to  regulate  present  affairs,  but  to  provide 
prudently  for  the  future.  This  gave  such  offence  to  the  two  sol- 
diers, that  they  secretly  planned  his  destruction.  When  Mam  sea 
understood  this,  she  prevented  their  design  by  putting  aside  the 
conspirators,  and  making  Ulpianus  the  sole  prefect  of  the  court. 
But  afterwards  becoming  suspected  by  the  army,  for  reasons 
which  I  am  unable  to  state,  there  being  many  various  reports 
concerning  his  inclination,  he  lost  his  life  in  a  tumult,  which  the 
emperor  himself  could  not  prevent. 

The  soldiers  after  this  event,  forgetting  by  degrees  their  former 
regard  for  Alexander,  appeared  unwilling  to  put  his  commands 
in  execution,  and  in  order  to  avoid  being  punished  for  their  neg- 
ligence, excited  public  commotions,  in  which  they  promoted  a 
person,  named  Antoninus,  to  the  empire.  But  he,  being  in* 
capable  of  sustaining  so  weighty  a  charge,  declined  it.  The^r 


*OOK  i.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  U 

chose  in  his  stead  Uranius,  a  man  of  low  and  servile  condition, 
whom  they  immediately  placed  before  Alexander,  drest  in  purple, 
by  which  they  intended  to  express  more  strongly  their  contempt 
for  the  emperor.  Alexander,  finding  himself  surrounded  with  so 
many  difficulties,  became  changed,  both  in  bodily  constitution 
end  in  disposition  ;  and  was  infected  with  an  insatiable  avarice, 
amassing  riches/  with  the  utmost  solicitude,  which  he  confided  to 
the  care  of  his  mother. 

While  his  affairs  were  thus  unfortunately  situated,  the  armies 
m  Pannonia  and  Mcesia,  which  were  far  from  respecting  him 
previously,  now  became  more  disposed  to  revolt,  and  being  there- 
fore determined  on  an  innovation,  raised  to  the  empire  Maximi- 
mis,, the  captain  of  a  Pannoniaii  troop.  Having  collected  all  hi* 
forces,  he  marched  into  Italy  with  the  utmost  speed,  thinking  iC 
the  safest  to  attack  the  emperor  by  surprise.  But  Alexander, 
who  was  then  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Rhine,  having  received  in- 
telligence of  their  intended  revolt,  proceeded  to  Rome  with- 
out loss  of  time.  He  offered  pardon  to  the  soldiers  and  to  Maxi- 
minus  upon  the  condition  that  they  would  desist  from  their 
attempt;  he  could  not  however  appease  them,  and  therefore 
desperately  exposed  himself  to  death.  Mamtfea  his  mother,  and 
the  prefects,  who  issued  from  the  palace  to  allay  the  tumult, 
were  likewise  murdered.  Maximinus  thus  became  well  esta- 
blished in  the  throne,  but  the  people  universally  regretted  the 
change  of  a  moderate  emperor  for  a  cruel  tyrant.  Maximinus  was 
of  obscure  birth,  and  therefore  on  his  exaltation  to  the  imperial 
dignity,  his  excessive  insolence  in  his  new  authority  eclipsed  those 
good  qualities  with  which  nature  had  endowed  him.  He  thus  be- 
came intolerable  to  all  men,  not  only  doing  injuries  to  those  that 
were  in  honourable  offices,  but  being  guilty  of  the  greatest  cruel- 
ties in  the  exercise  of  his  power,  bestowing  favours  only  upon  sy- 
cophants who  laid  information  against  quiet  persons,  by  charging 
them  with  being  debtors  to  the  imperial  treasury.  At  length 
he  went  so  far  as  to  murder  persons  out  of  avarice,  before  he  heard 
them  plead  in  their  own  defence,  seized  on  the  towns  as  his  own,, 
and  pluupered  the  inhabitants. 

The  nations  subject  to  the  Romans  being  unable  to  endure  his 
monstrous  cruelty,  and  greatly  distressed  by  the  ravages  he  com- 
mitted, the  Africans  proclaimed  Gordianus  and  his  son,  of  the 
same  name,  emperors,  and  sent  ambassadors  to  Rome,  one  of  whom 
was  Valerianus,  a  man  of  consular  rank,  who  afterwards  himself 
became  emperor.  This  was  highly  gratifying  to  the  senate, 
which  deliberated  how  to  remove  the  tyrant,  inciting  the  soldiers* 
to  revolt,  and  reminding  the  people  of  the  injuries  they  sustained* 


THE  HISTORY  BOCK  f. 


as  well  in  their  individual  capacities,  as  in  that  of  members,  of 
so  mighty  a  state.  Having  thus  agreed  how  to  act,  they  selected 
out  of  the  whole  senate  twenty  persons  who  understood  military 
discipline,  and  out  of  that  number  appointed  two,  Balbinus  and 
Maxirnus,  to  hold  the  chief  command,  and  proceeded  towards 
Rome,  bein^  ready  for  an  insurrection.  But  Maximinus,  hearing 
of  their  intention,  marched  with  great  precipitation  towards 
Rome,  with  the  Moors  and  Gauls  that  were  under  his  com- 
mand, and  on  the  way  laid  siege  to  the  garrison  of  Aquileia,  be- 
cause they  closed  their  gates  against  him.  His  own  party,  at 
length  consulting  the  public  benefit,  with  great  reluctance  con- 
sented to  those  who  wished  to  put  him  to  death,  and  he  was 
thereby  reduced  to  such  extremity,  as  to  be  under  the  necessity 
of  making  his  son  a  petitioner  in  his  behalf,  supposing  that  his 
tender  age  would  abate  their  auger  and  incline  them  to  compas- 
sion. But  at  this  they  became  more  enraged,  and  after  they  had 
murdered  the  boy  in  a  most  barbarous  manner,  they  dispatched 
the  father  likewise  ;  on  which  one  of  them  cut  off  his  head,  and 
carried  it  to  Rome,  'as  an  evidence  and  a  trophy  of  their  victory. 
Being  thus  delivered  from  all  their  apprehensions,  they  waited  for 
the  arrival  of  the  two  emperors  from  Africa. 

These  princes  being  wrecked  in  a  storm,  the  senate  conferred  the 
supreme  direction  of  affairs  on  Gordianus,  the  son  of  one  of  them. 
In  his  reign,  the  Romans  relaxed  a  little  from  their  former  me- 
lancholy, being  treated  by  the  emperor  with  jplays  and  other 
amusements.  But  awaking  as  it  were  from  a  profound  sleep,  they 
formed  a  secret  conspiracy  against  the  emperor,  instigated  by  the 
counsel  of  Balbinus  and  Maximus,  who  incited  some  of  the  sol- 
diers against  him.  This  being  detected,  the  heads  of  the  con- 
spiracy, and  many  of  the  accomplices,  were  put  to  death. 

Soon  after  this,  the  Carthaginians  became  discontented  with  the 
emperor,  and  attempted  to  substitute  Sabianusin  his  stead  ;  but 
Gordianus  raised  a  force  in  Africa,  which  quickly  caused  them  to 
submit.  Upon  this  they  delivered  up  the  intended  usurper,  so- 
licited pardon  for  their  offences,  and  were  freed  from  the  danger 
that  hung  over  them.  Meantime  Gordianus  married  the  daughter 
of  Timesicles,  a  man  in  high  estimation  for  his  learning,  and  ap- 
pointed him  prefect  of  the  court;  by  which  he  seemed  to  supply 
the  ()eficiency  of  his  own  youth  in  the  administration  of  public 
affairs.  Having  secured  the  empire,  he  was  in  continual  expec- 
tation that  the  Persians  would  make  an  attack  on  the  eastern 
provinces,  Sapores  having  succeeded  in  that  kingdom  to  Arta- 
xerxes,  who  had  restored  the  government  to  the  Persians  from  the 


BOOK  i.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  13 


Parttiians.  For  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  son  of  Philip, 
and  of  his  successors  in  the  empire  of  the  Macedonians,  at  the 
period  when  those  provinces  were  under  the  authority  of  Antio- 
chus,  Arsaces  a  Parthian,  being  exasperated  at  an  injury  done  to 
his  brother  Teridates*  made  war  upon  the  satrap  of  Antiochus, 
and  caused  the  Parthians  to  drive  away  the  Macedonians,  and 
form  a  government  of  their  own.  The  emperor  therefore  made 
all  possible  preparations  for  marching  against  the  Persians.  Al- 
though he  appeared  in  the  first  battle  to  have  obtained  the  vic- 
tory, yet  the  confidence  of  the  emperor  in  the  success  of  this  en- 
terprize  was  considerably  diminished  by  the  death  of  Timesicles, 
the  prefect  of  the  court.  Philip  being  chosen  in  his  place,  the 
emperor's  popularity  in  the  army  was  gradually  dissipated  and 
vanished.  Philip  was  a  native  of  Arabia,  a  nation  in  bad  repute, 
and  had  advanced  his  fortune  by  no  very  honourable  means.  As 
soon  as  he  was  fixed  in  his  office,  he  aspired  at  the  imperial  dignity, 
and  endeavoured  to  seduce  all  the  soldiers  that  were  disposed  to 
innovation.  Observing  that  abundance'of  military  provisions  was 
supplied,  while  the  emperor  was  staying  about  Carra3  and  Nisibis, 
he  ordered  the  ships  that  brought  those  provisions  to  go  further 
up  the  country,  in  order  that  the  army,  being  oppressed  with  fa- 
mine, might  be  provoked  to  mutiny.  His  design  succeeded  to  his 
wish;  for  the  soldiers,  under  pretence  of  want  of  necessaries, 
surrounded  Gordianus  in  a  violent  manner,  and  having  killed  him, 
as  the  chief  cause  of  so  many  perishing,  conferred  the  purple  on 
Philip  according  to  their  engagement.  He  therefore  made  peace 
with  Sapores,  and  marched  towards  Rome;  and  as  he  had  bound 
the  soldiers  to  him  by  large  presents,  he  sent  messengers  to  Rome 
to  report  that  Gordianus  had  died  of  a  disease.  On  his  arrival  at 
Rome,  having  made  the  senate  his  friends,  he  thought  it  most 
politic  to  confer  the  highest  preferments  on  his  near  relations. 
From  this  motive  he  made  his  brother  Priscus  general  of  the  army 
in  Syria,  and  intrusted  the  forces  in  Mcesia  and  Macedonia  to  his 
son-in-law  Severianus. 

Thinking  that  he  had  by  these  menns  established  himself  in 
the  possession  of  the  empire,  he  made  an  expedition  against  the 
"Carpi,  who  had  plundered  all  the  country  about  the  Ister.  When 
an  engagement  took  place,  the  Barbarians  not  being  able  to  with- 
stand the  impetuous  charge  6*f  the  Romans,  fled  into  a  castle  in 
which  they  were  besieged.  But  finding  that  their  troops,  who 
were  dispersed  in  various  directions,  had  again  rallied  in  a  body, 
they  resumed  their  courage,  and  sallying  from  the  castle  attacked 
the  Roman  army.  Being  unable  to  bear  the  brisk  onset  of  the 


U  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  i. 

Moors,  the  army  solicited  for  peace,  to  which  Philip  readily  assent- 
ed, and  marched  away.  As  there  were  at  that  time  many  disturb- 
ances in  the  empire,  the  eastern  provinces,  which  were  uneasy, 
partly,  owing  to  the  exactions  of  exorbitant  tributes,  and  partly  to 
their  dislike  of  Prisons,  their  governor,  who  was  a  man  of  an  into- 
lerably evil  disposition,  wished  for  innovation,  and  set  up  Papia- 
nus  for  emperor,  while  the  inhabitants  of  Mcesia  and  Pannonia 
were  more  inclined  to  Marinus. 

Philip,  being  disturbed  by  these  events,  desired  the  senate 
cither  to  assist  him  against  such  imminent  dangers,  or,  if  they 
were  displeased  with  his  government,  to  sutler  him  to  lay  it  down 
and  dismiss  him  quietly.  No  person  making  a  reply  to  this,  De- 
cms,  a  person  of  illustrious  birth  and  rank,  and  moreover  gifted 
with  every  virtue,  observed,  that  he  was  unwise  in  being  so  much 
concerned  at  those  events,  for  they  would  vanish  of  themselves, 
and  could  not  possibly  long  subsist.  And  though  the  event  corre- 
sponded with  the  conjecture  of  Decius,  which  long  experience  in 
the  world  had  enabled  him  to  make,  Papianus  and  Marinus  being 
taken  oif,  yet  Philip  was  still  in  fear,  knowing  how  obnoxious 
the  oilicers  in  that  country  were  to  the  army.  He  therefore  de- 
sired Decius  to  assume  the  command  of  the  legions  inMoesia  and 
Pannonia.  As  he  refused  this  under  the  plea  that  it  was  incon- 
venient both  for  Philip  and  himself,  Philip  made  use  of  the  rhe- 
toric of  necessity,  as  the  Thessalians  term  it,  and  compelled  him 
to  go  to  Pannonia  to  punish  the  accomplices  of  Marinus.  The 
army  in  that  country,  finding  that  Decius  punished  all  that  had 
offended,  thought  it  most  politic,  to  avoid  the  present  danger, 
and* to  set  up  a  sovereign  who  would  better  consult  the  good 
of  the  state,  and  who,  being  more  expert  both  in  civil  and  mili- 
tary afl'airs,  might  without  difficulty  conquer  Philip. 

For  this  purpose  they  clothed  Decius  in  purple,  and  notwith- 
standing all  his  apprehensions  of  future  mischances,  compelled 
him  to  assume  the  supreme  authority.  Philip  therefore,  on  hear- 
ing that  Decius  was  thus  made  emperor,  collected  all  his  forces 
to  overpower  him.  The  supporters  of  Decius,  though  they  knew 
that  the  enemy  had  greatly  the  advantage  in  numbers,  still  retained 
their  confidence,  trusting  to  the  general  skill  and  prudence  of 
Decius  in  affairs.  And  when  the  two  armies  engaged,  although 
the  one  was  superior  in  number,  yet  the  other  so  excelled  it  in 
discipline  and  conduct,  that  a  greatmumber  of  Philip's  partizans 
were  slain  (and  he  himself  amongst  them,  together  with  his  son, 
on  whom  he  had  conferred  the  title  of  Caesar.  Decius  thus  ac- 
quired the -empire. 


t.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  15 

The  Scythians,  taking  advantage  of  the  disorder  which  every 
where  prevailed  through  the  negligence  of  Philip,  crossed  the 
Tanais,  and  pillaged  the  countries  in  the  vicinity  of  Thrace.  But 
Decius,  marching  against  them,  was  not  only  victorious  in  every 
battle,  but  recovered  the  spoils  they  had  taken,  and  endeavoured 
to  cut  off  their  retreat  to  their  own  country,  intending  to  destroy 
them  all,  to  prevent  their  ever  again  making  a  similar  incursion. 
For  this  purpose  he  posted  Callus  on  the  bank  of  the  Tanais  with 
a  competent  force,  and  led  in  person  the  remainder  of  his  army 
against  the  enemy.  This  expedition  exceeded  to  his  utmost  wish  ; 
but  Gal  his,  who  was  disposed  to  innovation,  sent  agents  to  the  Bar- 
barians, requesting  their  concurrence  in  a  conspiracy  against  De- 
ciijs.  To  this  they  gave  a  willing  assent,  and  Galius  retained  his 
post  on  the  bank  of  the  Tanais,  but  the  Barbarians  divided  them- 
selves into  three  battalions,  the  first  of  which  posted  itself  behind 
a  marsh.  Decius  having  destroyed  a  considerable  number  of  the 
first  battalion,  the  second  advanced,  which  he  likewise  defeated, 
and  discovered  part  of  the  third,  which  lay  near  the  marsh.  Gal- 
lus  sent  intelligence  to  him,  that  he  might  march  against  them 
across  the  fen.  Proceeding  therefore  incautiously  in  an  unknown 
place,  he  and  his  army  became  entangled  in  the  mire,  and  under 
that  disadvantage  were  so  assailed  by  the  missiles  of  the  Barbarians, 
that  not  orje  of  them  escaped  with  life.  Thus  ended  the  life  of 
the  excellent  emperor  Decius. 

To  him  succeeded  Galius;  who  declared  his  son  Volusianus 
his  associate  in  the  empire,  and  published  an  open  declaration,  that 
Decius  and  his  army  had  perished  by  his  contrivance.  The  Bar- 
barians now  became  more  prosperous  than  before.  For  Galius 
not  only  permitted  them  to  return  home  with  the  plunder,  but 
promised  to  pay  them  annually  a  sum  of  money,  and  allowed  them 
to  carry  off  all  the  noblest  captives;  most  of  whom  had  been  taken 
at  Philippopolis  in  Thrace. 

Galius,  having  made  these  regulations,  came  to  Rome,  priding 
himself  on  the  peace  he  had  made  with  the  Barbarians.  And 
though  he  at  first  spoke  with  approbation  of  Decius's  mode  of 
government,  and  adopted  one  of  his  sons,  yet,  after  some  time  was 
elapsed,  fearing  that  some  of  them  who  were  fond  of  new  pro- 
jects might  recur  to  a  recapitulation  of  the  princely  virtues  of 
pecius,  and  therefore  might  at  some  opportunity  give  the  em- 
pire to  Jiis  son,  he  concerted  the  young  man's  destruction, 
without  regard  either  to  his  own  adoption  of  him,  or  to  common 
Honour  and  justice. 


16  THE  HISTORY 


Gall  us  was  so  supine  in  the  administration  of  the  empire,  that 
the  Scythians  in  the  first;  place  terrified  all  the  neighbouring 
nations,  and  then  laid  waste  all  the  countries  as  far  by  degrees  as 
the  sea  coast ;  not  leaving  one  nation  subject  to  the  Romans  un- 
pillaged,  and  taking  almost  all  the  unfortified  towns,  and  many 
that  were  fortified.  Beside^  the  war  on  very  side,  which  was 
insupportably  burdensome  to  them,  the  cities  and  tillages  were 
infested  with  a  pestilence,  which  swept  away  the  remainder  of 
mankind  in  those  regions;  nor  was  so  great  a  mortality  ever  known 
in  any  former  period. 

At  this  crisis,  observing  that  the  emperors  were  unable  to  de- 
fend the  state,  but  neglected  all  without  the  walls  of  Rome,  the 
Goths,  the  Borani,  the  Urugundi,  and  the  Carpi  once  more  plun- 
dered the  cities  of  Europe  of  all  that  had  been  left  in  them ;  while 
in  another  quarter,  the  Persians  invaded  Asia,  in  which  they  ac- 
quired possession  of  Mesopotamia,  and  proceeded  even  as  far  as 
Antioch  in  Syria,  took  that  city,  which  is  the  metropolis  of  all  the 
east,  destroyed  many  of  the  inhabitants,  and  carried  the  remainder 
into  captivity,  returning  home  with  immense  plunder,  after  they 
had  destroyed  all  the  buildings  in  the  city,  both  public  and  private, 
without  meeting  with  the  least  resistance.  And  indeed  the  Per- 
sians* had  a  fair  opportunity  to  have  made  themselves  masters  of 
all  Asia,  had  they  not  been  so  overjoyed  at  their  excessive  spoils, 
as  to  be  contented  with  keeping  and  carrying  home  what  they 
had  acquired. 

Meantime  the  Scythians  of  Europe  were  in  perfect  security  and 
went  over  into  Asia,  spoiling  all  the  country  as  far  as  Cappodocia, 
Pesinus,  and  Ephesus,  until  jEmilif  ^mander  of  the  Pan- 

nonian  legions,  endeavouring  as  mufti  .-  ^ossible  to  encourage  his 
troops,  whom  the  prosperity  of  the  Barbarians  had  so 'disheartened 
that  they  durst  not  face  them,  and  reminding  them  of  the  renown 
of  Roman  courage,  surprised  the  Barbarians  that  were  in  that 
neighbourhood.  Having  destroyed  great  numbers  of  them,  and 
Jed  his  forces  into  their  country,  removing  every  obstruction  to 
his  progress,  and  at  length  freeing  the  subjects  of  the  Roman 
empire  from  their  ferocity,  he  was  appointed  emperor  by  his  army. 
On  this  he  collected  all  the  forces  of  that  country,  who  were  be- 
come more  bold  since  his  successes  against  the  Barbarians,  and 
directed  his  march  towards  Italy,  with  the  design  of  fighting  Gal- 
lus,  who  was  as  yet  unprepared  to  contend  with  him.  For  Gallus 
had  never  heard  of  what  had  occurred  in  the  east,  and  therefore 
made  only  "vhat  accidental  preparations  were  in  his  reach,  while 
Valerianus  went  to  bring  the  Celtic  and  German  legions.  But 


BOOK  i.  OF   ZOSIMUS.  17 

^Emilianus  advanced  with  great  speed  into  Italy,  and  the  armies 
were  very  near  to  each  other,  when  the  soldiers  of  Gallus,  reflect- 
ing that  his  force  was  much  inferior  to  the  enemy  both  in  num- 
ber and  strength,  and  likewise  that  he  was  a  negligent  indolent 
man,  put  him  and  his  son  to  death,  and  going  over  to  the  party 
of  ^Emilianus,  appeared  to  establish  his  authority. 

But  Valerianus  brought  into  Italy  from  beyond  the  Alps  a  vast 
army,  with  which  he  deemed  himself  secure  of  conquering  ^Emi- 
lianus.  The  soldiers  of  JBmilianus,  who  saw  that  his  conduct  was 
more  like  that  of  a  private  sentinel  than  of  an  emperor,  now  put 
him  to  death  as  a  person  unfit  for  so  weighty  a  charge. 

By  these  means  Valerianus  became  emperor  with  universal 
consent,  and  employed  himself  in  the  regulation  of  affairs.  But 
the  excursions  of  the  Scythians,  and  of  the  Marcomanni,  who 
made  an  inroad  into  all  the  couutries  adjacent  to  the  empire, 
reduced  Thessalonica  to  extreme  danger  ;  and  though  they 
were  with  muct  difficulty  compelled  to  raise  the  siege  by  the 
brave  defence  of  those  within,  yet  all  Greece  was  in  alarm. 
The  Athenians  repaired  their  walls,  which  they  had  never 
thought  worth  their  care  since  Sylla  threw  them  down.  The 
Peloponnesians  likewise  fortified  the  Isthmus,  and  all  Greece  put 
itself  upon  its  guard  for  the  general  security. 

Valerianus,  perceiving  the  empire  in  danger  on  every  side,  asso- 
ciated his  son  Gallienus  with  himself  in  the  government!  and 
went  himself  into  the  east  to  oppose  the  Persians.  He  entrusted  to 
his  son  the  care  of  the  forces  in  Europe,  thus  leaving  him  to  resist 
the  Barbarians  wKlo .-'  >f^rl,in  upon  him  in  every  direction.  As  the 
Germans  were  the  rii,, , ,,. kmblesome  enemies,  and  harrassed  the 
Gauls  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Rhine,  Gallienus  marched  against  them 
in  person,  leaving  his  officers  to  repel  with  the  forces  under  their 
command  any  others  that  should  enter  Italy,  Illyricum,  and  Greece. 
With  these  designs,  he  possessed  himself  of  and  defended  the  pas- 
sages of  the  Rhine,  at  one  timepreventing  their  crossing,  and  atano- 
ther  engaging  them  as  soon  as  they  had  crossed  it.  But  having  onlv 
a  small  force  to  resist  an  immense  number,  he  was  at  a  loss  how  to 
act,  and  thought  to  secure  himself  by  a  league  with  one  of  the 
German  princes.  He  thus  not  only  prevented  the  other  Barbarians 
from  so  frequently  passing  the  Rhine,  but  obstructed  the  access 
of  auxiliaries. 

Meanwhile  the  Borani,  the  Goth  i,  the  Carpi,  and  the  Uru- 
gundi,  nations  that  dwell  on  the  Ister,  left  no  part  of  Italy  or 
Illyricum  unpillaged,  but  devasted  all  without  any  opposition. 
The  Borani,  indeed,  attempted  to  pass  over  into  Asia,  which  they 

VOL.    1,    NO.    1.  C 


THE  HISTORY 

easily  effected  by  the  aid  of  those  that  reside  on  the  Bosphorus,  who 
were  induced  more  through  fear  than  good-will  to  supply  them 
with  vessels,  and  to  guide  them  in  their  passage.  For  though  while 
they  were  governed  by  their  own  kings,  who  succeeded  in  an 
hereditary  descent,  they  had  always  kept  the  Scythians  out  of 
Asia,  either  from  the  regard  they  had  for  the  Romans,  or  for  the 
sake  of  their  commerce,  or  out  of  gratitude  for  the  annual  pre- 
sents sent  them  by  their  kings ;  yet  subsequently,  when  the  royal 
line  was  extinct,  and  the  authority  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of 
mean  and  worthlessjndividuals,  they  yielded  to  fear,  and  gave  the 
Scythians  a  free  ingress  into  Asia,  even  carrying  them  over  in 
their  own  ships. 

While  the  Scythians  plundered  all  before  them,  the  people  who 
inhabited  on  the  sea-coast  of  Pontus,  removed  into  the  fortified 
towns  in  the  interior  ;  the  barbarians  at  the  same  time  making  an 
attack  on  Pityus,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  strong  wall,  and  pos- 
sesses a  convenient  harbour.  But  Successianus,  who  commanded 
the  army  there,  made  so  vigorous  a  defence,  that  the  Barbarians 
were  routed,  and  in  such  dread  lest  the  other  garrisons  hearing 
what  was  done  might  join  with  that  of  Pityus  and  totally  destroy 
them,  that  they  hastened  with  the  utmost  speed  to  their  ships,  and 
returned  home  under  great  hazard,  having  lost  many  of  their  com- 
panions at  the  battle  of  Pityus.  Thus  the  inhabitants  of  the  vicinity 
of  the  Euxine  sea,  who  owed  their  preservation  to  the  conduct 
of  Successianus,  were  relieved  from  all  present  apprehension 
lest  the  Scythians  after  this  repulse  should  pay  them  another  visit. 
But  while  Valerianus  sent  for  Successianus,  made  him  prefect 
of  the  court,  and  consulted  with  him  about  the  repairing  of  An- 
tioch,  the  Scythians  procured  ships  from  the  Bosphorans,  and 
again  crossed  the  streight.  The  inhabitants  of  the  other  side  re- 
tained the  vessels,  and  would  not  permit  the.  Bosphorans  to  take 
them  home  again,  as  they  had  before  done,  on  which  they  ad- 
vanced into  the  country  near  to  Phasis,  where  is  the  temple  of 
Diana,  called  from  the  place  Phasiana,  and  the  palace  of  king 
^Eeta  ;  and  having  made  a  fruitless  attempt  to  take  that  temple, 
proceeded  direct  to  Pityus.  Having  there  seized  on  the  castle, 
and  turned  out  the  garrison,  they  advanced  forward  ;  and  as  they 
had  a  large  navy  into  which  they  put  all  the  captives  who  were 
able  to  manage  an  oar,  they  sailed  with  favourable  weather,  which 
continued  almost  the  whole  summer,  towards  Trapezus.  This 
is  a  large  and  populous  city,  and  was  then  guarded  by  ten  thou- 
sand men  above  the  usual  complement.  When  they  commenced 
the  siege  of  it,  they  did  not  therefore  even  imagine  that  they  should 


BOOK  i.  OF   ZOSIMUS.  19 

succeed,  as  it  was  surrounded  by  two  walls ;  but  when  they  ob- 
served that  the  soldiers  were  addicted  to  sloth  and  inebriety,  and 
that  instead  of  continuing  on  guard,  they  were  always  in  search 
of  pleasures  and  debauchery,  they  piled  against  the  wall  trees 
which  they  had  prepared  for  the  purpose  of  scaling  it,  on  which 
their  troops  mounted  in  the  night  and  took  the  city.  The  sol- 
diers within  were  struck  with  consternation  at  the  sudden  and 
unexpected  assault;  some  of  them  succeeded  in  escaping  through 
the  gates;  the  rest  were  slaughtered  by  the  enemy.  .  Having 
thus  got  possession  of  the  place,  the  Barbarians  acquired  'an 
incredible  quantity  of  money,  besides  a  very  great  number  of 
slaves ;  for  almost  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  had  fled  for 
refuge  into  that  city,  as  it  was  strongly  fortified.  Having  demo- 
lished all  the  temples  and  houses,  and  every  thing  that  contributed 
to  the  grandeur  or  ornament  of  the  city,  and  devastated  the  adja- 
cent country,  they  returned  home  with  a  great  number  of  ships: 

When  the  neighbouring  Scythians  perceived  the  booty  they 
had  acquired,  they  determined  on  making  a  similar  attempt,  and 
for  that  purpose  prepared  a  fleet,  which  their  captives,  and  others 
who  through  necessity  had  taken  up  their  abode  among  them,  as- 
sisted them  in  buildiug.  They  resolved  however  not  to  set  out 
as  the  Borani  had,  because  it  was  tedious  and  hazardous  to  sail 
that  way,  and  they  would  have  to  pass  through  places  that  were 
already  plundered.  They  staid  therefore  until  winter,  and  then 
leaving  to  their  left  the  Euxine  sea,  and  ta  the  right  the  Ister, 
Tomes,  and  Anchialus,  while  their  land  forces  marched  as  quickly 
as  they  could  along  the  shore*,  they  arrived  at  the  lake  of  Philea* 
tina,  which  lies  to  the  west  of  JByzantium  near  the  Pontus.  Find- 
ing that  the  fishermen  of  that  lake  had  concealed  themselves  and 
their  vessels  in  the  neighbouring  fens,  they  made  an  agreement 
with  them,  to  put  their  land  forces  on  board  the  fishermenrs  boats, 
and  sailed  forward  in  order  to  pass  the  streight  between  Byzan- 
tium and  Chalcedon.  And  though  there  was  a  guard  from  Chal- 
cedon  as  far  as  the  temple  which  stands  at  the  entrance  of  the  Pon- 
tus, which  was  strong  enough  to  overpower  the  Barbarians,  yet 
some  of  the  troops  marched  away  under  the  pretext  of  meeting  a 
general  whom  the  emperor  had  sent  there,  and  others  were  so  ter- 
rified that  when  they  first  heard  of  it  they  fled  with  all  possible 
precipitation.  The  Barbarians  then  crossed  over,  took  Chalcedon 
without  opposition,  and  got  possession  of  abundance  of  money, 
arms,  and  provisions. 

From  thence  they  marched  to  Nicomedia,  a  great  city,  celebrated 
for  its  affluence;  where,  though  the  citizens  on  hearing  of  their 


o0  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  i. 


approach  had  escaped  with  all  the  riches  they  could  take  with 
them,  the  Barbarians  still  were  astonished  at  the  vast  quantity  of 
valuables  they  found,  and  rendered  great  honour  to  Chryso- 
gonus,  who  had  f9nnerly  advised  them  to  go  to  Nicomedia. 
And  when  they  had  over-run  Nioea,  Cius,  Apamaea,  and  Prusa, 
and  treated  those  places  in  the  same  manner,  they  proceeded  to- 
wards Cyzicus  ;  but  the  river  Rhyndacus  had  so  overflown  its 
banks  in  consequence  of  the  violent  rains  that  had  fallen,  that  they 
were  unable  to  cross  it  and  were  compelled  to  retire.  They  then 
set  fire  to  Nicomedia  and  Nicaea,  and  loading  with  their  spoil 
waggons  and  ships,  began  to  think  of  returning  hoitte;  which  ter- 
minated their  second  incursion. 

Valerianus  had  by  this  time  beard  of  the  disturbances  in 
Bithynia,  but  his  district  wo'»ld  not  allow  him  to  confide  the 
defence  of  it  to  any  of  his  generals.  He  therefore  sent  Felix  to 
Byzantium,  and  went  in  person  from  Antioch  into  Cappadocia, 
and  after  he  had  done  some  injury  to  every  city  by  which  he 
passed,  he  returned  homeward.  But  the  plague  then  attacked 
his  troops,  and  destroyed  most  of  them,  at  the  time  when  Sapor 
made  an  attempt  upon  the  east,  and  reduced  most  of  it  into  sub- 
jection. In  the  mean  time,  Valerianus  became  so  effeminate  and 
indolent,  thathedispaired  of  ever  recovering  from  the  present  ill 
state  of  ail'airs,  and  would  have  concluded  the  war  by  a  present 
of  money;  had  not  Sapor  sent  back  the  ambasauors  who  were 
sent  to  him  with  that  proposal,  without  their  errand,  desiring  the 
emperor  to  come  and  speak  with  him  in  person  concerning  the 
affairs  he  wished  to  adjust  To  Xvhich  he  most  imprudently 
consented,  and  going  without  consideration  to  Sapor  with  a 
small  retinue,  to  treat  for  a  peace,  was  presently  laid  hold  of  by 
the  enemy,  and  so  ended  his  days  in  the  capacity  of  a  slave 
among  the  Persians,  to  the  disgrace  of  the  Roman  name  in  all 
future  times. 

Such  being  the  state  of  the  east,  an  universal  confusion  and 
feebleness  prevailed  at  that  period.  The  Scythians  unanimously 
collected  into  one  body  out  of  every  nation  and  country  within 
their  territory,  one  part  of  their  forces  plundering  Illyricum, 
and  laying  waste  its  towns,  while  the  remainder  penetrated 
into  Italy  as  far  as  Rome. 

Gallienus  in  the  mean  time  still  continued  beyond  the  Alps, 
intent  on  ttoe  German  war,  while  the  Senate,  seeing  Rome  in  such 
imminent  danger,  armed  all  the  soldiers  that  were  in  the  city, 
and  the  strongest  of  the  common  people,  and  formed  an  army, 
which  exceeded  the  Barbarians  in  number.  This  so  alarmed 


OF   ZOSIMUS. 


the  Barbarians,  that  they  left  Rome,  but  ravaged  all  tire  rest  of 
Italy.  At  this  period,  when  I-Uyricum  groaned  under  the  op- 
pression of  the  Barbarians,  and  the  whole  Roman  empire  was 
in  such  a  helpless  state  as  to  be  on  the  very  verge  of  ruin,  a  plague 
happened  to  break  out  in  several  of  the  towns,  more  dreadful 
than  any  that  had  preceded  it.  The  miseries  inflicted  on  them 
by  the  Barbarians  were  thus  alleviated,  even  the  sick  esteeming 
themselves  fortunate.  The  cities  that  had  been  taken  by  the 
Scythians  were  thus  deserted. 

Gallienus,  being  disturbed  by  these  occurrences,  was  return- 
ing to  Rome  to  relieve  Italy  from  the  war  which  the  Scythians 
were  Jhus  carrying  on.  It  was  at  this  time,  that  Cecrops,  a  Moor, 
Aureolus  and  Antoninus,  with  many  others,  conspired  against 
him,  of  whom  the  greater  part  were  punished  and  submitted. 
Aureolus  alone  retained  his  animosity  against  the  emperor. 

After  this,  Posthumus,  who  commanded  the  Celtic  army, 
\vas  also  inclined  towards  innovation,  and  accompanied  some 
soldiers  that  revolted  at  the  same  time  to  Agrippina,  which  is 
the  principal  city  on  the  Rhine,  in  which  he  besieged  Salo- 
nius,  the  son  of  Gallienus,  threatening  to  remain  before  the  walls 
until  he  was  given  up  to  him.  On  this  account  the  soldiers 
found  it  necessary  to  surrender  both  him  and  Silvanus,  whom 
his  father  had  appointed  his  guardian,  both  of  whom  Posthumus 
put  to  death,  and  made  himself  sovereign  of  the  Celtae. 

The  Scythians,  who  had  dreadfully  afflicted  the  whole  of 
Greece,  had  now  taken  Athens,  when  Gallienus  advanced  against 
those  who  were  already  in  possession  of  Thrace,  and  ordered 
Odonathus  of  Palmyra,  a.  person  whose  ancestors  had  always 
been  highly  respected  by  the  emperors,  to  assist  the  eastern 
nations  which  were  then  in  a  very  distressed  condition.  Accord- 
ingly, having  joined  to  the  remainder  of  an  army  that  still  re- 
gained in  the  country  many  ef  his  own  troops,  he  attacked  Sapor 
\vith  great  boldness;  and  having  taken  several  cities  belong- 
ing to  the  Persians,  he  retook  Nisibis  also,  which  Sapor  had  for- 
merly taken,  and  ravaged  it  at  the  same  time.  Then  advancing, 
not  once  merely,  but  a  second  time,  as  far  as  Ctesiphon,  he  blocked 
up  the  Persians  in  their  fortifications,  and  rendered  them  content 
to  save  their  wives,  their  children  and  themselves,  while  he  dis- 
posed of  the  pillaged  country  at  hi?  pleasure.  Shortly  afterwards, 
whilst  residing  at  Emisa,  he  lost  his  life  by  a  conspiracy  as  he 
was  celebrating  the  birth-day  of  a  friend.  Zenobiathen  took  upon 
iier  the  administration  of  affairs.  She  was  the  wife  of  Odona- 


THE   HISTORY  BOOK  i. 


thus,  but  had  the  courage  of  a  man,  and  with  the  assistance  of 
her  husband's  friends,  acted  in  every  respect  as  well  as  he 
had  done. 

While  affairs  were  thus  situated  in  the  east,  intelligence  was 
brought  to  Gallienus,  who  was  then  occupied  in  the  Scythian 
war,  that  Aurelianus,  or  Aureolus,  who  was  commander  of 
the  cavalry  posted  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Milan  to  watch  the 
motions  of  Posthumus,  had  formed  some  new  design,  and  wa» 
ambitious  to  be  emperor.  Being  alarmed  at  this  he  went  im- 
mediately to  Italy,  leaving  the  command  against  the  Scythians 
with  Marcianus,  a  person  of  great  experience  in  military  affairs. 
While  he  carried  on  the  war  with  gceat  ability,  Gallienus,  in  his 
journey  towards  Italy,  had  a  plot  formed  against  him  by  Hera- 
clianus,  prefect  of  the  court,  who  communicated  his  design  to- 
Claudius,  in  whom  the  chief  management  of  affairs  was  vested. 
The  design  was  to  murder  Gallienus.  Having  found  a  man  very 
ready  for  such  an  undertaking,  who  commanded  a  troop  of  Dal- 
matians, he  entrusted  the  action  to  him.  To  effect  it,  the  party 
stood  by  Gallienus  at  supper  and  informed  him  that  some  of  the 
spies  had  brought  intelligence,  that  Aureolus  and  his  army  were 
close  at  hand.  By  this  they  considerably  alarmed  him.  Calling 
immediately  for  his  horse  and  arms,  he  mounted,  ordering  his  mea 
to  follow  him  in  their  armour,  and  rode  away  without  any  atten- 
dance. Thus  the  captain  finding  him  alone  killed  him. 

When  the  troops  were  calmed  by  their  commanders,  Claudius 
was  chosen  emperor,  having  previously  been  designed  for  that 
dignity  by  general  consent.  Aureolus,  who  had  for  a  long  time 
kept  himself  out  of  the  hands  of  Gallienus,  presently  sent  agents 
to  Claudius,  to  effect  a  peace.  Surrendering  himself,  he  was 
killed  by  the  guards  of  the  emperor,  who  still  remembered  the 
hatred  they  bore  against  him  for  his  treachery. 

The  Scythians  were  by  this  time  so  elated  by  their  former 
success,  that  they  appointed  a  place  of  meeting  with  the  Heruli, 
Peucae,  and  Gothi,  near  the  river  Tyra,  which  empties  itself 
into  the  Pontus ;  where  having  built  six  thousand  vessels,  and 
put  on  board  them  three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  men, 
they  sailed  across  the  Pontus,  and  made  an  attempt  on  Tomes, 
a  fortified  town,  but  were  repulsed  from  it.  From  thence  they 
proceed  to  Marcianopolis,  a  city  of  Mysia,  but  failing  there  like- 
wise in  their  attack  on  it,  they  took  the  opportunity  of  a  favour- 
able wind  and  sailed  forward.  On  their  arrival  at  the  streights 
of  Propontis,  they  could  not  manage  their  vessels  in  so  violent  a 
current,  and  while  they  were  carried  down  by  it  without  any 


BOOK  i.  OF   ZOSIMUS. 


order,  they  fell  foul  on  each  other,  by  which  some  of  them  were 
sunk,  and  others  driven  on  shore,  to  the  great  destruction  both  of 
men  and  ships.  On  this  account  the  Barbarians  departed  from 
the  Propontis,  and  sailed  towards  Cyzicus.  Being  obliged  to 
return  from  thence  without  success,  they  passed  through  the 
Hellespont,  and  arrived  at  Mount  Athos.  Having  th'ere  refitted 
and  careened  their  vessels,  they  laid  siege  to  Cassandria  and  Thes- 
salonica,  which  they  were  near  taking  by  means  of  machines 
•which  they  raised  against  the  walls.  But  hearing  that  the  em- 
peror was  advancing  with  an  army,  they  went  into  the  interior, 
plundering  all  the  neighbourhood  of  Doberus  and  Pelagonia. 
There  they  sustained  a  loss  of  three  thousand  men,  who  were 
met  with  by  the  Dalmatian  cavalry,  and  with  the  rest  of  their 
force  engaged  the  army  of  the  emperor.  Great  numbers  were  slain 
in  this  battle  on  both  sides,  but  the  Romans,  by  a  pretended  flight, 
drew  the  Barbarians  into  an  ambuscade  and  killed  more  than 
fifty  thousand  of  them.  The  remainder  of  the  Scythians  sailed 
round  Thessaly  and  Greece  to  pillage  all  the  country,  and  as 
they  were  not  strong  enough  to  attack  the  towns  which  had 
fortified  themselves,  and  provided  for  their  own  security,  they 
carried  off  all  the  men  that  they  found  in  the  open  country. 

The  Scythians  being  thus  dispersed,  with  the  loss  of  great 
part  of  their  troops,  Zenobia  began  to  think  of  extending  her 
dominion,  and  therefore  sent  Zabdas  into  Egypt,  because  Tima- 
genes  an  Egyptian  attempted  to  place  Egypt  under  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Palmyrenians.  He  had  for  this  purpose  raised  an 
army  of  Palmyrenians,  Syrians,  and  Barbarians,  to  the  number 
of  seventy  thousand,  which  was  opposed  by  fifty  thousand  Egyp- 
tians. A  sharp  engagement  ensued  between  them,  in  which  the 
Palmyrenians  had  greatly  tfre  advantage.  He  then  departed, 
leaving  them  a  garrison  of  five  thousand  men. 

During  these  transactions,  Probus,  who  had  been  appointed  by 
the  emperor  to -clear  the  sea  of  pirates,  having  heard  of  the  subju- 
gation of  Egypt  by  the  Palmyrenians,  marched  against  them  with 
his  own  forces,  and  with  as  many  of  the  Egyptians  as  were  averse 
to  the  Palmyrenians,  and  drove  out  their  garrison!  The  Palmyre- 
nians rallying  with  fresb  forces,  Probus,  having  levied  a  body  of 
Egyptians  and  Africans,  gained  another  victory,  and  drove  the 
Palmyrenians  out  of  Egypt  But  as  Probus  was  encamped  OIL 
a  mountain  near  Babylon,  thereby  cutting  off  the  passage  of  the 
enemy  into  Syria,  Timagenes,  who  was  well  acquainted  vvilli  the 
country,  seized  on  the  summit  of  the  mountain  with  two  thou- 
sand men,  and  attacked  the  Egyptians  by  surprize.  Probus 
being  taken  with  the  rest  .killed  himself. 


24  THE   HISTORY.  BOOK  F, 

Egypt  being  thus  reduced  by  the  Palmyrenians,  the  Barbari- 
ans, who  survived  the  battle  of  Naissus  between  Claudius  and  the 
Scythians,  defending  themselves  with  their  carriages  which  went. 
before  them,  marched  towards-  Macedon,  but  were  so-  distressed 
by  the  want  of  necessaries,  that  many  of  them  and  of  their  beasts 
perished  with  hunger.  They  were  met  likewise  by  the  Roman 
cavalry,  who  having  hilled  many  of  them,  drove  the  rest  towards- 
Mount  Hiumus;  where  being  surrounded  by  the  Roman  army,, 
they  lost  a  vast  number  of  men.  But  a  quarrel  ensuing  between 
the  Roman  horse  and  foot  soldiers,  the  emperor  wishing  the  foot 
to  engage  the  Barbarians,  the  Romans,  after  a  smart  engagement,, 
were  defeated  with  considerable  loss,  but  the  cavalry,  coming  up* 
immediately*  redeemed  in  some  degree  the  miscarriage  of  the  in- 
fantry. After  this  battle,  the  Barbarians  proceeded  on  their 
march,  and  were  pursued  by  the  Romans.  The  pirates  who 
cruized  about  Crete  and  Rhodes  retired  without  doing  any 
thing  worthy  of  mention;  and  being  attacked  by  the  plague  on 
their  way  home,  same  of  them  died  in  Thrace  and  some  in  Mace- 
don. All  that  survived  were  either  admitted  into  the  Roman  le- 
gions, or  had  lands  assigned  for  them  to  cultivate  and  so  become 
husbandmen.  Nor  was  the  plague  confined  to  the  Barbarians 
alone,  but  began  to  infest  the  Romans,  many  of  whom  died,  and 
amongst  the  rest  Claudius,  a  person  adorned  with  every  virtue. 
His  death  was  a  severe  loss  to  his  subjects,  and  was  consequently 
much  regretted  by  them. 

Quintillus,  the  brother  of  Claudius,  was  then  declared  emperor.. 
He  had  reigned  but  a  few  months,  and  had  performed  nothing 
worthy  of  notice,  before  Aurelianus  was  raised  to  the  imperial 
throne.  Some  writers  inform  us,  that  Quintillus  was  advised  by 
his  friends,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  Aurei-ianus  being  made  em- 
peror,todie  by  his  own  hand,  and  give  place  voluntarily  to  a  man* 
of  so  much  greater  merit.  They  report,  that  he  complied  by  open- 
ing a  vein  and  bleeding  to  death.  Aurelianus,  having  regulated  the 
empire,,  went  from  Rome  to  Aquileia,  and  from  thence  into  Pan- 
nonia,  which  he  was  informed  the  Scythians  were  preparing  to 
invade.  For  this  reason  he  sent  orders  to  die  inhabitants  of  that 
country  to  tarry  into  the  towns  all  their  corn  and  cattle,  and 
every  thing  that  could  be  of  use  to  the  enemy,  in  order  to  distress- 
them  with  famine,  with  which  they  were  already  afflicted.  The- 
Barbajians  having  crossed  the  river  into  Pannonia  had  an  engage- 
ment, the  result  of  which  was  nearly  equal.  But  the  same  night,, 
the  Barbarians  recrossed  the  river,  and  as  soon  as  day  appeared,, 
sent  ambassadors  to  treat  for  peace. 


BOOK  i.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  25 

The  Emperor,  hearing  that  the  Ajemanni  and  the  neighbour- 
ing nations  intended  to  over-run  Italy,  was  with  just  reason  more 
concerned  for  Rome  and  the  adjacent  places,  than   for  the  more 
remote.     Having  therefore  ordered  a  sufficient  force  to  remain  for 
the  defence  of  Pannonia,   he  marched   towards  Italy,  and  on  his 
route,  on  the  borders  of  that  country,  near  the  Ister,  slew  many 
thousands  of  the  Barbarians  in  one  battle.     Several  members  of 
the  senate  being  at  this  time  accused  of  conspiring  against  the 
emperor  were  put  to  death  ;  and  Rome,  which  before  had  no  walls, 
was  now  surrounded  with  them.  This  work  was  begun  in  the  reign 
of  Aurelianus,  and  was   finished  by  Probus.     At  the  same  time 
Epitimius,  Urbanus,  and  Domitianus,  were  likewise  suspected 
as  innovators,  and  were  immediately  apprehended  and  punished. 
During  these  occurrences  in  Italy  and   Pannonia,  the  emperor 
prepared   to  march  against  the  Palmyrenians,  who  had  subdued 
all  Egypt,  and  the  east,  as  far  as  Ancyra  in  Galatia,  and  would 
have  acquired  Bithynia  even  as  far  as  Chalcedon,  if  the  inhabi- 
tants of  that  country  had  not  learned  that  Aurelianus  was  made 
emperor,  and  so  shook  off  the  Palmyrenian  yoke.     As  soon  as  the 
.emperor  was  on  his  march  thither,  Ancyra  submitted  to  the  Ro- 
mans, and  afterwards  Tuana,  and  all  the  cities  between  that  and 
Antioch.     There  finding  Zenobia  with  a  large  army  ready  to  en- 
gage, as  he  himself  also  was,  he  met  and  engaged  her  as  honour 
obliged  him.     But  observing  that  the  Palmyrene  cavalry  placed 
great  confidence  in  their  armour,  which  was  very  strong  and  se- 
cure, and  that  they  were  much  better  horsemen  than  his  soldiers, 
he  planted  his  infantry  by  themselves  on  the  other  side  the  Oron- 
tes.    He  charged  his  cavalry  not  to  engage  immediately  with  the 
vigourous  cavalry  of  the  Palmyrenians,  but  to  wait  for  their  attack, 
and  then,  pretending  to  fly,  to  continue  so  doing  until  they  had 
wearied  both  the  men  and  their  horses  through  excess  of  heat 
and  the  weight  of  their  armour;  so  that  they  could  pursue  them 
no  longer.  This  project  succeeded,  and  as  soon  as  the  cavalry  of  the 
emperor  saw  their  enemy  tired, and  that  their  horses  were  scarcely 
able  to  stand  under  them,  or  themselves  to  move,  they  drew  up  the 
reins  of  their  horses,  and,  wheeling  round,  charged  them,   and 
trod  them  under  foot  as  they  fell  from  their  horses.      By  which 
means  the  slaugther  was  promiscuous,  some  falling  by  the  sword, 
and  others  by  their  own  and  the  enemies'  horses. 

After  this  defeat,  the  remains  of  the  enemy  fled  into  Antioch, 
Labdas,  the  general  of  Zenobia,  fearing  that  the  4nti°chians  on 
hearing  of  it  should  mutiny,  chose  a  man  resembling  the  emperor, 

VOL.    1.    NO.    1.  D 


26  THE  HISTORY BOOK  •* 

and  clothing  him  in  a  dress  such  as  Aurelianus  was  accustomed 
to  wear,  led  him  through  the  city  as  if  he  had  taken  the  emperor 
prisoner.  By  this  contrivance  he  imposed  on  the  Antiochians, 
stole  out  of  the  city  by  night,  and  took  with  him  Zenobia  with  the 
remainder  of  the  army  to  Emisa.  In,  the  mean  time,  the  emperor 
was  intent  on  his  affairs,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  day  called  the  foot 
soldiers  around  him,  intending  to  attack  the  defeated  enemy  on 
both  sides ;  but,  hearing  of  the  escape  of  Zenobia,  he  entered  An- 
tioch,  where  he  was  joyfully  received  by  the  citizens.  Finding 
th,at  many  had  left  the  city,  under  apprehensions  that  they  should 
suffer  for  having  espoused  the  party  of  Zenobia;  he  published 
edicts  in  every  place  to  recal  them,  and  told  them,  that  such 
events  had  happened  more  through  necessity  than  of  his  own  in- 
clination. When  this  was  known  to  the  fugitives,  they  returned 
in  crowds,  and  were  kindly  received  by  the  emperor;  who  having 
arranged  affairs  in  that  city  proceeded  to  Emisa.  Finding  that  a 
party  of  the  Palmyrenians  had  got  possession  of  a  hill  above  the 
suburbs  of  Daphne,  thinking  that  its  steepness  would  enable  them 
to  obstruct  the  enemy's  passage,  he  commanded  his  soldiers  to 
march  with  their  bucklers  so  near  to  each  other,  and  in  so  com- 
pact a  form,  as  too  keep  off  ai?y  darts  and  stones  that  might  be 
thrown  at  them.  This  being  observed,  as  soon  as  they  ascended 
the  hill,  being  in  all  points  equal  to  their  adversaries,  they  put  them 
to  flight  in  such  disorder,  that  some  of  them  were  dashed  in  pieces 
from  the  precipices,  and  others  slaughtered  in  the  pursuit  by  those 
that  were  on  the  hill,  and  those  that  were  mounting  it.  Having 
gained  the  victory,  they  marched  on  with  great  satisfaction  at  the 
success  of  the  emperor,  who  was  liberally  entertained  at  Apamea, 
Larissa,  and  Arethusa.  Finding  the  Palmyrene  army  drawn  up 
before  Emisa,  amounting  to  seventy  thousand  men,  consisting  of 
Palmyrenes  and  their  allies,  he  opposed  to  them  the  Dalmatian 
cavalry,  the  Mcesians  and  Pannonians,  «md  the  Celtic  legions  of 
Noricum  and  RhaBtia,  and  besides  these  the  choicest  of  the  im- 
perial regiment  selected  man  by  man,  the  Mauritanian  horse, 
the  Tyaneans,  the  Mesopotamians,  the  Syrians,  the  Phoenicians, 
and  the  Palestinians,  all  men  of  acknowledged  valour;  the  Pa- 
lestinians besides  other  arms  wielding  clubs  and  staves.  At  the 
commencement  of  the  engagement,  the  Roman  cavalry  receded, 
lest  the  Palmyrenes,  who  exceeded  them  in  number,  and  were 
better  horsemen,  should  by  some  stratagem  surround  the  Ro- 
man army.  But  the  Palmyrene  cavalry  pursued  them  so  fiercely, 
though  their  ranks  were  broken,  that  the  event  was  quite  con- 
trary to  the  expectation  of  the  Roman  cavalry.  For  they  were 


BOOK  i.      OF  ZOSIMUS. 27 

pursued  by  an  enemy  much  their  superior  in  strength,  and  there- 
fore most  of  them  fell.  The  foot  had  to  bear  the  brunt  of  the 
action.  Observing  that  the  Palmyrenes  had  broken  their  ranks 
when  the  horse  commenced  their  pursuit,  they  wheeled  about, 
and  attacked  them  while  they  were  scattered  and  out  of  order. 
Upon  which  many  were  killed,  because  the  one  side  fought  with 
the  usual  weapons,  while  those  of  Palestine  brought  clubs  and 
staves  against  coats  of  mail  made  of  iron  and  brass.  The  Palmy- 
renes therefore  ran  away  with  the  utmost  precipitation,  and  in 
their  flight  trod  each  other  to  pieces,  as  if  the  enemy  did  not  make 
sufficient  slaughter;  the  field  was  filled  with  dead  men  and  horses, 
whilst  the  few  that  could  escape  took  refuge  in  the  city. 

Zenobia  was  not  a  little  disturbed  by  this  defeat,  and  therefore 
consulted  on  what  measures  to  adopt.  It  was  the  opinion  of  all 
her  friends  that  it  would  be  prudent  to  relinquish  all  pretensions 
to  Emisa,  because  the  Emisenes  were  disaffected  towards  her  and 
friendly  to  the  Romans.  They  advised  her  to  remain  within  Pal- 
myra, and  when  they  were  in  security  in  that  strong  city,  they 
would  deliberate  at  leisure  on  their  important  affairs.  This  was 
no  sooner  proposed  than  done,  with  the  concurrence  of  the  whole 
assembly.  Aurelianus,  upon  hearing  of  the  flight  of  Zenobia,  en- 
tered Emisa,  where  he  was  cordially  welcomed  by  the  citizens, 
and  found  a  treasure  which  Zenobia  could  not  carry  along  with 
her.  He  then  inarched  immediately  to  Palmyra,  which  he  invested 
on  every  side,  while  his  troops  were  supplied  with  provisions  of 
every  kind  by  the  neighbouring  country.  Meantime  the  Palmy- 
renes only  derided  the  Romans,  as  if  they  thought  it  impossible  for 
them  to  take  the  city ;  and  one  man  in  particular  spoke  in  very 
indecent  terms  of  the  emperor's  own  person;  Upon  this,  a  Persian 
who  stood  by  the  emperor  said,  "  If  you  will  allow  me,  sir,  you 
shall  see  me  kill  that  insolent  soldier :"  to  which  the  emperor  con- 
sented, and  the  Persian,  placing  himself  behind  some  other  men 
that  he  might  not  be  seen,  shot  at  the  man  while  in  the  ^act  of 
looking  over  the  battlements,  and  hit  him  whilst  still  uttering  his 
insulting  language,  so  that  he  fell  down  from  the  wall  before  the 
soldiers  and  the  emperor.  The  besieged  however  still  held  out, 
in  hopes  that  the  enemy  would  withdraw  for  want  of  provisions, 
and  persisted  in  their  resolution,  until  they  were  themselves  with- 
out necessaries.  They  then  called  a  council,  in  which  it  was  de- 
termined to  fly  to  the  Euphrates,  and  request  aid  of  the  Persians 
against  the  Romans.  Having  thus  determined,  they  set  Zeno- 
bia on  a  female  camel,  which  is  the  swiftest  of  that  kind  of 


28 THE  HISTORY BOOK  i. 

animals,  and  much  more  swift  than  horses,  and  conveyed  her  out 
of  the  city. 

Aurelianus  was  much  displeased  at  the  escape  of  Zenobia ;  and 
therefore  exerted  all  his  industry  to  send  out  horsemen  in  pursuit  of 
her.  They  succeeded  in  taking  her,  as  she  was  crossing  the  Eu- 
phrates in  a  boat,  and  brought  her  to  Aurelianus.  Though  much 
pleased  at  this  sight,  yet  being  of  an  ambitious  disposition,  he 
became  uneasy  at  the  reflection  that  in  future  ages  it  would  not  re- 
dound to  his  honour  to  have  conquered  a  woman.  Meantime  some 
of  the  Palmyrenes,  that  were  shut  up  in  the  town,  resolved  to  ex- 
pose themselves  courageously,  and  to  hazard  their  being  made  cap- 
tives in  defence  of  their  city.  While  others  on  the  contrary  em- 
ployed humble  and  submissive  gestures  from  the  walls,  and  in- 
treated  pardon  for  what  was  past.  The  emperor  accepting  these* 
tokens,  and  commanding  them  to  fear  nothing,  they  poured  out 
of  the  town  with  presents  and  sacrifices  in  their  hands.  Aurelia- 
nus paid  due  respect  to  the  holy  things,  received  their  gifts,  and 
sent  them  away  without  injury. 

But  having  made  himself  master  of  this  city,  with  all  the 
treasure  'it  contained,  he  returned  to  Emisa,  where  he  brought 
Zenobia  and  her  accomplices  to  a  judiciary  trial.  Zenobia 
coining  into  court  pleaded  strongly  in  excuse  of  herself,  and  pro- 
duced many  persons,  who  had  seduced  her  as  a  simple  woman, 
and  among  the  rest  Longinus,  whose  writings  are  highly  bene- 
ficial to  all  lovers  of  learning.  Being  found  guilty  of  the  crimes 
laid  to  his  charge,  he  received  from  the  emperor'sentence  of  death, 
which  he  bore  with  so  much  courage,  as  to  console  his  friends 
who  were  much  concerned  at  his  misfortunes.  Several  besides 
Longinus  suffered  upon  the  accusation  of  Zenobia. 

I  cannot  here  omit  to  mention  what  happened  before  the  ruin, 
of  Palmyra,  though  I  profess  only  to  write  a  transient  history. 
For  as  Polybius  informs  us  by  -what  means  the  Romans  in  a 
short  space  of  time  attained  a  vast  empire,  it  is  my  purpose  to 
show  on  the  other  hand,  that  by  their  ill  management  in  as  short 
a  time  they  lost  it.  But  I  am  now  speaking  of  the  Palmyrenes, 
who,  having  as  I  related,  acquired  a  large  portion  of  the  Roman 
empire,  were  warned  by  several  declarations  from  the  gods  of 
the  overthrew  which  they  afterwards  sustained.  For  example; 
at  Seleucia  in  Cilicia  there  was  a  temple  of  Apollo  (called  there 
Sarpedonius)  and  in  that  temple  an  oracle.  It  is  reported  of 
this  deity,  that  he  used  to  give  to  those  that  were  infested 
with  locusts  a  species  of  birds,  called  Seleuciades,  which  used  to 
hover  about  his  temple,  and  would  send  them  along  with  any 


A60K-I.  OF  ZOSIMDS. 


that  desired  it;  that  these  birds   would  fly  amongst  the  locusts, 
•catch  them  in  their  mouths,  and  in  a  moment  destroy  a  vast  num- 
ber of  them,  thus  delivering  the  people  from  the  mischief  they 
produced.     This   I  ascribe  to  the  felicity  of  that  age  ;  our  own 
generation   has  not   merited   such  kindness  from  heaven.      The 
Palmyrenes,  having  consulted  this  oracle,  to  learn  if  they  should 
-ever  gain  the  empire  of  the  east,  received  this  answer, 
Accursed  race  !  avoid  my  sacred  fane, 
Whose  treach'rous  deeds  the  angry  gods  disdain. 

And  some  persons  enquiring  there  concerning  the  success  of  the 
expedition  of  Aurelianus  against  the  Palmyrenes,  the  gods  told 
them, 

One  falcon  many  doves  commands,  whose  end 

On  his  destructive  pounces  must  depend. 

Another  story  was  likewise  much  circulated  of  the  Palmyrenes. 
Between  Heliopolis  and  Bilbis  is  a  place  called  Aphaca,  where  is 
a  temple  dedicated  to  Venus  Aphacitis,  and  near  it  a  pond  re- 
sembling an  artificial  cistern.  Here  is  frequently  seen,  near  the 
temple  and  in  the  adjacent  places,  a  fire  in  the  air,  resembling  a 
lamp,  of  a  round  figure,  which  has  appeared  even  in  our  time, 
as  often  as  people  have  assembled  there  on  particular  days.  Who- 
ever resorted  hither,  brought  to  the  pond  some  offering  for  the 
goddess,  either  in  gold,  silver,  linen,  silk,  or  any  thing  of  like 
value.  If  she  accepted  it,  the  cloth  sunk  to  the  bottom,  likt 
substances  of  greater  weight ;  but  if  rejected,  they  would  float 
on  the  water;  and  not  only  cloth  and  such  substances,  but  even 
gold,  silver,  or  any  other  of  those  materials  which  usually  sink. 
For  an  experiment  of  this  miracle,  the  Palmyrenes,  in  the  year  be- 
fore their  overthrow,  assembled  on  a  festival,  and  threw  into  the 
pond  several  presents  of  gold,  silver  and  cloth,  in  honour  of  the 
goddess,  all  of  which  sunk  to  the  bottom.  In  the  following  year, 
at  the  same  festival,  they  were  all  seen  floating  on  the  surface  ; 
by  which  the  goddess  foretold  what  would  happen. 

In  this  manner  was  the  regard  of  heaven  shewn  to  the  Romans, 
as  long  as  they  kept  up  their  sacred  rites.  But  it  is  my  lot  to 
speak  of  these  times,  wherein  the  Roman  empire  degenerated 
to  a  species  of  barbarity,  and  fell  to  decay.  I  shall  display  the 
causes  of  such  misfortunes ;  and  point  out  those  oracles,  by 
which  such  events  were  predicted.  I  ought  now  to  return  to  the 
place  whence  I  digressed ;  lest  I  should  appear  to  leave  the  order 
of  history  imperfect,  Aurelianus  inarched  towards  Europe, 
carrying  with  him  Zenobia,  her  son,  and  the  rest  of  the  confede- 
rates in  this  rebellion.  .Zenobia  is  said  to  have  died,  either  of 


39  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  i. 

disease,  or  want  of  food,  but  the  rest  were  all  drowned  in  the 
straight  between  Chalcedon  and  Byzantium.  Aurelianus  con- 
tinued his  journey  into  Europe.  On  his  route  he  was  informed 
"by  a  messenger,  tfiat  a  party  he  had  left  at  Palmyra,  having  won 
over  Apsaeus,  the  .principal  author  of  all  that  was  past,  was  tam- 
pering with  Marcellinus,  whom  the  emperor  had  appointed  pre- 
fect of  Mesopotamia  and  of  the  east,  to  assume  to  himself  the 
imperial  robe.  Under  pretence  of  taking  time  for  deliberation, 
he  delayed  them  so  long,  that  they  again  importuned  him  re^ 
peatedly.  He  was  forced  therefore  to  frame  ambiguous  answers 
to  their  demands,  until  he  had  given  notice  to  Aurelianus  of 
their  design.  In  the  meantime  the  Palmyrenes,  having  clothed 
Antiochus  in  purple,  continued  at  Palmyra.  Aurelianus,  being 
informed  of  this,  hastened  into  the  east,  without  any  prepara- 
tion, and  arriving  at  Antioch,  surprized  all  the  people,  who  were 
then  attending  a  horse-race,  and  were  astonished  at  seeing  him. 
From  thence  he  proceeded  to  Palmyra,  which  he  took  and  razed 
without  a  contest,  but  not  thinking  Antiochus  worthy  of  being  pu- 
nished, on  account  of  the  meanness  of  his  condition,  he  dismissed 
him.  After  this  action,  he  speedily  reduced  the  Alexandrians, 
who  were  disposed  to  a  rebellion,  being  already  in  commotion. 
He  then  entered  Rome  in  triumph,  where  he  was  most  magnili- 
ciently  received  by  the  senate  and  people.  At  this  period  also 
he  erected  that  sumptuous  temple  of  the  Sun,  which  he  orna- 
mented with  all  the  sacred  spoils  that  he  brought  from  Palmyra ; 
placing  in  it  the  statues  of  the  sun  and  Bel  us.  After  this  he  easily 
reduced  Tatricus  with  his  rebellious  accomplices,  whom  he 
brought  to  signal  punishment.  He  likewise  called  in  all  the 
counterfeit  money,  and  issued  new,  to  avoid  confusion  in  trade. 
Besides  which  he  bestowed  on  the  people  a  gift  of  bread,  as  a 
mark  of  his  favour ;  and  having  arranged  all  affairs  set  out  on  a 
journey  from  Rome. 

During  his  stay  at  Perinthus,  now  called  Heraclea,  a  conspi- 
racy was  thus  formed  against  him.  There  was  in  the  court  a 
man  named  Eros,  whose  office  was  to  carry  out  the  answers  of  the 
emperor.  This  man  had  been  for  some  fault  threatened  by  the 
emperor,  and  put  in  great  fear.  Dreading  therefore  lest  the  empe- 
ror should  realize  his  menaces  by  actions,  he  went  to  some  of 
the  guard,  whom  he  knew  to  be  the  boldest  men  in  the  court ; 
he  told*  them  a  plausible  story,  and  shewed  them  a  letter  of 
his  own  writing,  in  the  character  of  the  emperor  (which  he  had 
long  before  learned  to  counterfeit),  and  persuading  them  frrst  that 
they  themselves  were  to  be  put  to  death,  which  was  the  meaning 


BOOK  i.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  31 

expressed  by  the  letter,  he  endeavoured  to  prevail  on  them  to  mur- 
der the  emperor.  The  deception  answered.  Observing  Aureli- 
anus  to  go  out  of  the  city  with  a  small  retinue,  they  ran  out  upon 
him  and  murdered  him.  He  was  buried  on  the  spot  with  great 
magnificence  by  the  army  in  consideration  of  the  great  services 
he  had  performed,  and  the  dangers  he  had  undergone  for  the 
.good  of  the  public. 

Upon  his  death  the  empire  fell  into  the  hands  of  Tacitus,  in 
whose  time  the  Scythians  crossed  the  Palus  Mueotis,  and  made  in- 
cursions through  Pontus  even  into  Cilicia,  until  he  opposed  them. 
Partly  in  person, -and  partly  by  Florianus,  prefect  of  the  court, 
whom  he  left  in  commission  for  that  purpose,  this  emperor 
completely  routed  and  destroyed  them.  He  himself  was  going  into 
Europe,  but  was  thus  circumvented  and  killed.  'He  had  commit- 
ted the  government  of  Syria  to  his  cousin  Maximinus,  who  treated 
the  nobility  of  that  country  with  such  austerity,  that  he  caused 
them  both  to  hate  and  fear  him.  Their  hatred  became  so  exces- 
sive, that  at  length  conspiring  with  the  murderers  of  Aurelianus, 
they  assaulted  Maximinus,  and  having  killed  him,  fell  on  and 
slew  Tacitus  also  as  he  was  upon  his  departure. 

An  universal  civil  disturbance  now  arose,  those  of  the  east 
chusing  Probus  emperor,  and  those  at  Rome  Florianus.  The  for- 
mer of  these  governed  all  Syria,  Phoenicia,  Palestine,  and  Egypt ; 
but  the  latter  was  in  possession  of  all  the  countries  from  Cilicia  to 
Italy;  besidea^vhich  the  homage  ofallthenations  beyond  the  Alps, 
the  Gauls,  Spaniards,  Britons,  and  Africans  was  paid  to  him. 
When  both  therefore  were  ready  for  war,  Florianus  came  to  Tar- 
sus, resolving  to  encamp  there,  leaving  his  victory  over  the  Scy- 
thians at  the  Bosphorus  unfinished,  by  which  he  gave  them  an  op- 
portunity of  recovering  themselves  and  returning  home,  though 
he  had  cutoff  their  retreat.  Probus  protracted  the  time,  because 
he  came  with  less  preparation  for  a  battle.  By  these  means  it 
came  to  pass,  that  the  weather,  being  exceedingly  hot,  a  pestilen- 
tial disorder  broke  out  amongst  the  troops  of  Florianus,  most  of 
whom  were  Europeans,  and  consequently  unaccustomed  to  such 
excessive  heat,  by  which  many  were  taken  off.  When  Probus 
understood  this,  he  thought  it  a  proper  time  to  attack  the  enc.ny. 
The  soldiers  of  Florianus,  attempting  what  exceeded  their  strength, 
fought  some  slight  skirmishes  before  the  city,  but  nothing  being 
done  worthy  of  notice,  some  of  the  troops  of  Probus  deposed  Flo- 
rianus. Having  performed  this,  he  was  kept  in  custody  for  some 
time,  until  his  own  soldiers  said,  that  it  was  the  will  of  Probus 
that  he  should  share  the  empire.  Florianus  therefore  assumed 


THE  HISTORY  BOOH  t* 


the  purple  robe  again,  until  the  return  of  those  who  were  sent  to 
know  the  true  resolution  of  Probus.  On  their  arrival  they  caused 
Florianus  to  be  killed  by  his  own  soldiers. 

Probus,  having  thus  gained  the  empire,  marched  forward,  and 
performed  a  very  commendable  action  for  the  public  good,  as  a 
prelude  to  what  he  should  afterwards  do.  For  he  resolved  ta 
punish  those  who  had  murdered  Aurelianus,  and  conspired  against 
Tacitus  ;  though  for  fear  of  an  insurrection  toe  did  not  openly  exe- 
cute his  design,  but  planted  a  company  of  men,  in  whom  he  had 
confidence,  at  a  convenient  post,  near  to  which  he  invited  the 
murderers  to  a  feast.  Coming  there  in  expectation  of  being  en- 
tertained at  the  emperor's  table,  Probus  ascended  into  a  balcony 
from  whence  he  could  view  the  action,  which  he  gave  a  signal  to 
his  men  to  perform.  As  soon  as  they  had  received  it,  they  fell  on 
the  murderers  in  their  defenceless  state,  and  left  only  one  of  them 
alive,  whom  he  caused  afterwards  to  be  burnt  alive,  as  a  very  dan- 
gerous criminal. 

While  Probus  was  thus  employed,  Saturninus,  a  Moor,  the 
most  familiar  friend  of  the  emperor,  and  for  that  reason  en- 
trusted with  the  government  of  Syria,  threw  off  his  allegiance, 
and  rebelled  against  the  emperor.  When  Probus  learned  this,  he 
rosolved  to  frustrate  his  designs,  but  was  anticipated  by  the  sol- 
diers in  the  east,  who  destroyed  Saturninus  and  all  his  associates* 
He  likewise  suppressed  an  insurrection  in  Britian,  by  means  of 
Victorinus,  a  Moor,  who  had  persuaded  him  to  conjfcr  the  govern- 
ment of  Britain  upon  the  leader  of  the  insurgents.  Having  sent 
for  Victorinus,  and  chosen  him  for  his  consul,  he  sent  him  to- 
appease  the  disturbance;  who  going  presently  to  Britain,  took  off 
the  traitor  by  a  stratagem.  Having  performed  these  affairs  as  I 
have  related,  Probus  obtained  several  victories  over  the  Barba- 
rians in  two  different  wars  ;  in  one  of  which  he  himself  com- 
manded, but  left  the  other  to  the  conduct  of  his  lieutenant.  Per- 
ceiving that  it  was  necessary  to  assist  the  cities  of  Germany  which 
lay  upon  the  Rhine,  and  were  harrassed  by  the  Barbarians,  he 
marched  with  his  army  towards  that  river.  When  the  war  be- 
gan there,  a  grievous  famine  prevailed  throughout  the  surround- 
ing country  ;  but  a  heavy  shower  of  rain  and  corn  fell  together, 
so  that  in  some  places  were  great  heaps  of  it  made  by  its  own  de- 
scent. At  this  prodigy,  all  were  so  astonished  that  at  first  they 
dared  not  touch  the  corn  to  satisfy  their  hunger  ;  but  being  at 
length  forced  to  it  by  necessity,  which  expels  all  fear,  they  made 
bread  of  it,  which  not  only  allayed  their  hunger,  but  enabled 
them  to  gain  the  victory  with  great  ease.  The  emperor  terminated 


BOOK  i.  OF   ZOSIMUS.  33 

several  other  wars,  with  scarcely  any  trouble  ;  and  fought  some 
fierce  battles,  first  against  the  Logiones,  a  German  nation,  whom 
he  conquered,  taking  Semno  their  general,  and  his  son,  prisoners. 
These  he  pardoned  upon  submission,  but  took  from  them  all  the 
captives  and  plunder  they  had  acquired,  and  dismissed,  on  cer- 
tain terms,  not  only  the  common  soldiers,  but  even  Semno  and  his 
son.  Another  of  his  battles  was  against  the  Franks,  whom  he 
subdued  through  the  good  conduct  of  his  commanders.  He  made 
war  on  the  Burgundi  and  the  Vandili.  But  seeing  that  his  forces 
were  too  weak,  he  endeavoured  to  separate  those  of  his  enemies, 
and  engage  only  with  a  part.  His  design  was  favoured  by  fortune ; 
for  the  armies  lying  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  the  Romans  chal- 
lenged the  Barbarians  that  were  on  the  further  side  to  fight.  This 
so  incensed  them,  that  many  of  them  crossed  over,  and  fought 
until  the  Barbarians  were  all  either  slain  or  taken  by  the  Romans ; 
except  a  few  that  remained  behind,  who  sued  for  peace,  on  con- 
dition of  giving  up  their  captives  and  plunder;  which  was  ac- 
ceded to.  But  as  they  did  not  restore  all  that  they  had  taken, 
the  emperor  was  so  enraged,  that  he  fell  on  them  as  they  were 
retiring,  killed  many  of  them,  and  took  prisoner  their  general 
Igillus.  All  of  them  that  were  taken  alive  were  sent  to  Britain, 
where  they  settled,  and  were  subsequently  very  serviceable  to  the 
emperor  when  nny  insurrection  broke  out.  The  wars  upon  the 
Rhine  being  thus  terminated,  a  circumstance  happened  in  Isauria 
which  should  not  be  omitted.  There  was  an  Isaurian  named  Ly- 
dius,  who  had  been  a  robber  from  his  youth,  and  with  a  gang 
like  himself  had  committed  depredations  throughout  Pamphylia 
and  Lycia.  This  gang  being  attacked  by  the  soldiers,  Lydius, 
not  being  able  to  oppose  the  whole  Roman  army,  retreated  to  a 
place  in  Lycia  called  Crymna,  which  stands  on  a  precipice,  and  is 
secured  on  one  side  by  large  and  deep  ditches.  Finding  many  who 
had  fled  there  for  refuge,  and  observing  that  the  Romans  were 
very  intent  on  the  siege,  and  that  they  bore  the  fatigue  of  it  with 
great  resolution,  he  pulled  down  the  houses,  and  making  the 
ground  fit  for  tillage,  sowed  corn  for  the  maintenance  of  those 
that  were  in  the  town.  But  the  number  being  so  great  that 
they  were  in  need  of  much  more  provisions,  he  turned  out  of 
the  place  all  that  were  of  no  service,  both  male  and  female.  The 
enemy  perceiving  his  design  forced  them  back  again  ;  on  which 
Lydius  threw  them  headlong  into  the  trenches  that  surrounded 
the  walls,  where  they  died.  Having  done  this,  he  constructed 
a  mine,  from  the  town  beyond  the  enemies'  camp;  through 

VOL.    1,    NO.    1.  E 


34  THE  HISTORY  aoon;  i. 

which  he  sent  persons  to  steal  cattle  and  other  provisions.  By 
these  means  he  provided  for  the  besieged  a  considerable  time, 
until  the  affair  was  discovered  to  the  enemy  by  a  woman.  Ly- 
dius,  however,  still  did  not  despond;  but  gradually  retrenched 
his  men  in  their  wine,  and  gave  them  a  smaller  allowance  of  corn. 
But  this  not  answering  the  end,  he  was  at  length  driven  to  such 
streights,  that  he  killed  all  that  were  in  the  town,  except  a  few  of 
his  adherents,  sufficient  as  he  thought  to  defend  it,  and  some  wo- 
men, whom  he  ordered  to  be  in  common  among  them  all.  But 
when  he  had  resolved  to  persevere  against  all  dangers,  there  hap- 
pened at  length  this  accident.  There  was  with  him  in  the  town 
a  man  who  was  expert  in  making  engines,  and  in  using  them  with, 
such  dexterity,  that  when  Lydius  ordered  him  to  shoot  a  dart  at 
any  of  the  enemy,  he  never  missed  his  aim.  It  happened  that  Ly- 
dius had  ordered  him  to  hit  a  particular  person,  whom  either  ac- 
cidently  or  on  purpose  he  missed,  for  which  he  stripped  and 
scourged  him  severely,  and,  moreover,  threatened  him  with  death. 
The  man  was  so  exasperated  on  account  of  the  blows  he  had  re- 
ceived, and  so  affrighted  at  the  menaces,  that  he  took  an  opportu- 
nity to  steal  out  of  the  town ;  and  falling  in  with  some  soldiers 
to  whom  he  gave  an  account  of  his  actions  and  sufferings,  he ' 
shewed  them  an  aperture  in  the  wall,  through  which  Lydius  used 
to  inspect  all  that  was  done  in  their  camp,  and  promised  them  to 
shoot  him  as  he  was  looking  through  it  in  his  usual  manner.  The 
commander  of  the  expedition  on  this  took  the  man  into  favour; 
who,  having  planted  his  engine,  and  placed  some  men  before 
him  that  he  might  not  be  discovered  by  the  enemy,  took  aim  at 
Lydius  as  he  looked  through  the  aperture,  and  with  a  dart  shot 
him  and  gave  him  a  mortal  wound.  He  had  no  sooner  received 
this  wound,  than  he  became  still  more  strict  with  some  of  his  own 
men.  Having  enjoined  them  upon  oath  never  to  surrender  the 
place,  he  expired  with  much  struggling. 

Ptolemais  in  Thebais  having  revolted  from  the  emperor,  and 
commenced  a  war.  Probus,  by  the  good  conduct  of  his  officers, 
compelled  both  t'hat  place  and  its  allies  to  surrender.  He  likewise 
left  in  Thrace  the  Bastarnae,  a  Scythian  people,  who  submitted  to 
him,  giving  them  land  to  inhabit  there ;  on  which  account  they  ob- 
served the  Roman  laws  and  customs.  Bt  the  Franks  having  ap- 
plied to  the  emperor,  and  having  a  country  given  to  them,  a  part 
of  them  afterwards  revolted,  and  having  collected  a  great  number 
of  ships,  disturbed  all  Greece  ;  from  whence  they  proceeded  into 
Sicily,  to  Syracuse,  which  they  attacked,  and  killed  many  people 
there.  At  length  they  arrived  in  Africa,  whence  though  they  were 


BOOK  H.  OF  ZOSIMUS.      ,  35 

repulsed  by  a  body  of  men  from  Carthage,  yet  they  returned  home 
without  any  great  loss.  This  circumstance  likewise  happened  dur- 
ing the  reign  of  Probus.  Eighty  gladiators  conspiring  together, 
and  having  killed  their  keepers,  ran  out  into  the  city,  and  plun- 
dered all  in  their  way,  many  other  persons,  as  is  usual  in  such 
cases,  without  doubt  mixing  with  them.  But  the  emperor  sent  a 
party  and  suppressed  them.  When  Probus,  who  was  a  brave 
and  just  prince,  had  done  this  ******* 

(The  remainder  of  this  book  and  the  beginning  of  the  next  are 
lost,  to  supply  that  deficiency  in  the  narrative  we  have  collected 
from  other  authors  this  short  account ;)  "  Probus  was  succeeded 
by  Carus,  who  marched  against  the  Persians  as  far  as  Ctesiphon, 
where  he  received  the  appellation  of  the  Persian  emperor,  but 
soon  afterwards  died,  According  to  some,  of  a  disease,  though 
others  state,  that  he  was  killed  by  lightning.  He  had  two  sons, 
Numerianus  a  very  promising  youth,  from  whom  the  state  might 
have  expected  all  possible  happiness  and  good,  had  he  not  been 
murdered  byAper  ;  and  Carinus,  a  person -abandoned  to  all  kinds 
of  vice,  who  was  killed  by  Diocletian." 


SECOND  BOOK. 


********  THE  longest  period  of  the  life  of  man  is  only 
equal  to  the  intermediate  space  between  these  games.  For  an 
age,  or  the  space  of  one  hundred  years,  which  we  call  «<wV,  is 
by  the  Romans  called  seculum.  This  is  an  excellent  remedy  for 
the  plague,  consumption  and  other  diseases ;  of  its  origin  receive 
this  account.  Valesus  Valseius,  from  whom  descended  the  Va- 
lerian family,  was  a  great  man  among  the  Sabines,  before  whose 
house  was  a  grove  of  very  lofty  trees,  which  were  burnt  with 
lightning.  He  was  thus  induced  to  enquire  the  meaning  of  such  a 
portent.  His  children,  moreover,  falling  sick,  he  consulted  both 
the  physicians  and  the  soothsayers.  He  was  told  by  them,  that  by 
the  manner  of  the  fir^e  falling  the  gods  were  angry  ;  which  caused 
Valesius  wisely  to  attempt  by  sacrifices  to  appease  them.  He  and 
his  wife  being  terrified,  and  expecting  every  moment  the  death 
of  their  children,  he  prostrated  himself  before  Vesta,  and  promised 
to  offer  up  two  entire  souls  instead  of  their  children,  which  were 
his  own  and  that  of  their  mother.  But  turning  to  the  grove  that 
had  been  burnt,  he  seemed  to  hear  a  voice  that  commanded  him 
to  carry  the  children  to  Tarentum,  and  there  to  warnVsome 


36*  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  it, 


Tiber  water  over  the  fire  of  Pluto  and  Proserpine,  and  to  give  it  to 
the  children  to  drink.  On  hearing  this  he  despaired  the  more  of 
the  recovery  of  the  children.  For  Tarentum  was  at  a  great  dis- 
tance, and  besides  there  was  no  Tiber  water  to  be  had  there :  and 
it  caused  him  to  entertain  more  desponding  thoughts  of  it,  that 
the  voice  had  told  him  the  water  must  be  warmed  on  the  altar  of 
the  infernal  deities,  at  which  the  soothsayers  themselves  were  also 
startled.  However,  having  heard  it  the  second  time,  he  obeyed 
the  command  of  the  gods.  Putting  his  children  on  board  a 
small  river-vessel,  he  carried  the  fire  along  with  him.  The  child- 
ren were  ready  to  faint  through  heat,  while  he  sailed  to  that  part 
of  the  river  where  the  stream  is  most  gentle  ;  and  taking  up  his 
lodging  at  a  shepherd's  cottage,  he  heard  a  voice  say,  that  he  must 
stay  at  Tarentum,  for  that  was  the  nam^of  the  place,  which  had 
the  same  name  with  Tarentum  near  the  lapygian  promontory. 
On  which  Valesius,  having  paid  due  adoration  to  the  gods  for 
his  good  fortune,  ordered  the  pilot  to  put  to  shore,  and,  landing, 
told  the  whole  story  to  the  shepherds.  Presently  taking  some 
.water  -out  of  the  Tiber,  and  heating  it  on  an  altar  erected  by 
himself, , he  gave  it  to  his  children  to  drink;  as  soon  as  they  had 
drunk  it  they  fell  asleep  and  were  perfectly  cured.  But  in  that 
sleep  they  fancied  that  they  saw  a  vision,  which  told  them  to  of- 
fer black  victims  to  Pluto  and  Proserpine,  and  to  spend  three  nights 
in  singing  and  dancing;  which  dream  they  communicated  to  their 
father,  ami  that  it  was  a  huge  man  of  a  godlike  presence,  who  or- 
dered them  to  do  it  in  the  Campus  Martius,  where  the  horse-races 
are  held.  Valesius,  therefore,  intending  to  build  an  altar  in  that 
place,  set  the  masons  to  dig,  who  found  an  altar  ready  made,  on 
which  was  inscribed.  "  To  Pluto  and  Proserpine'*.  By  which 
being  more  plainly  instructed  how  to  act,  he  sacrificed  the  black 
victims  on  the  altar,  and  kept  the  vigils  in  that  place. 

This  same  altar,  and  the  manner  of  sacrificing  on  it,  thus  origi- 
nated. The  Romans  and  the  Albans  being  at  war,  and  both  pre- 
pared for  battle,  a  monstrous  figure  appeared,  clothed  in  a  black 
skin,  and  crying  out,  that  Pluto  and  Proserpine  commanded  sa- 
crifices to  be  made  to  them  before  they  fought,  it  disappeared. 
On  which,  the  Romans,  who  were  terrified  at  the  sighjt,  made 
an  altar  under  ground,  and  when  they  had  sacrificed  on  it  buried 
it  at  the  depth  of  twenty  feet,  in  order  that  it  might  not  be  found 
by  any  but  themselves.  Valesius  having  found  it,  according  to 
command,  sacrificed  upon  it,  and  kept  the  vigils;  for  which  he 
was  called  Manius  Valerius  Tarentinus.  For  the  Romans  call  the 
infernal  gods  Manes,  and  Valere  signifies  to  be  in  good  health} 


BOOK  n.  OF   ZOSIMUS. 


and  the  surname  of  Tarentinus  he  derived  from  Tarentum  where 
he  sacrificed.  Some  time  afterwards,  when  a  plague  happened 
in  the  city,  which  was  the  year  after  the  expulsion  of  the  kings, 
Publuis  Valerius  Publicola  sacrificed  a  black  bull  and  a  black 
heifer  to  Pluto  and  Proserpine,  by  which  he  freed  the  city  from 
the  disease.  He  wrote  on  the  altar  this  inscription  ;  "  Publius 
Valerius  Publicola  dedicated  fire  to  Pluto  and  Proserpine  in  the 
Campus  Martius,  and  exhibited  spectacles  in  honour  of  them, 
for  the  preservation  of  the  Roman  people." 

But  afterwards,  when  they  were  oppressed  with  diseases  and 
wars,  which  was  in  the  year  352  after  the  building  of  the  city, 
the  senate  endeavoured  to  deliver  themselves  from  those  calami- 
ties by  means  of  the  oracles  of  the  Sibyls,  and  therefore  com- 
manded those  whose  office  it  was  to  consult  those  oracles.  Hav- 
ing so  done  they  told  the  senate,  that  by  sacrificing  to  Pluto  and 
Proserpine  an  end  would  be  put  to  all  their  miseries.  They 
therefore  chose  a  convenient  place,  which  they  consecrated  to 
Pluto  and  Proserpine  as  they  were  commanded,  when  Marcus 
Potitus  was  in  his  fourth  consulate.  And  when  the  ceremony 
was  completed,  being  delivered  from  their  grievances,  they  again 
laid  aside  the  altar  in  some  extremity  of  the  Campus  Martius. 
These  rites  were  afterwards  neglected  for  many  years,  until  some 
misfortunes  befel  them,  and  then  Octavianus  Augustus  renewed 
the  games  which  had  before  been  celebrated,  when  Lucius 
Censorinus  and  Marcus  Manlius  Pueliuswere  consuls.  They  were 
again  used  under  the  consulate  of  Lucius  Censorinus  <and  Caius 
Sabinus,  when  Ateius  Capito  had  explained  the  laws  concerning 
them,  and  the  fifteen  men  who  had  the  care  of  the  books  of  the 
Sibyls  had  found  out  the  time  when  the  sacrifice  ought  to  be  per- 
formed and  the  games  held.  After  Augustus  was  dead,  these 
games  were  celebrated  by  Claudius,  without  any  regard  to  the 
due  time.  After  him  Domitian,  who  paid  no  regard  to  what 
Claudius  had  done,  computed  the  years  from  the  time  when 
Augustus  kept  that  festival,  and  seemed  to  observe  their  original 
institution.  And  after  them  Severus  in  the  hundred  and  tenth 
year  restored  the  same  game,  with  his  two  sons  Antoninus  and 
Geta,  when  Chilo  and  Libo  were  consuls.  This  is  said  to  be  the 
manner  in  which  these  games  were  observed.  The  beadles  went 
round  at  the  time,  and  invited  all  the  people  to  a  spectacle,  such 
as  they  had  never  witnessed  and  never  would  again.  The  Quin- 
decimviri,  in  the  summer  season,  a  little  before  the  games  began, 
sat  in  the  Capitol,  and  in  the  Palatine  temple,  upon  a  tribunal, 
from  which  they  distributed  to  the  people  a  kind  of  purifying  pre- 


38  THE  HISTORY.  BOOK  n. 

parations,  called  lustralia,  which  consisted  of  torches,  brimstone 
and  pitch,  of  which  none  but  freemen  are  allowed  to  participate. 
And  when  the  people  assembled  in  the'above  mentioned  places 
and  in  the  temple  of  Diana,  which  is  on  mount  Aventine,  each 
person  brought  wheat,  barley,  and  beans,  and  kept  vigils  to  the 
fatal  sisters.     The  time  of  the  festival  being  arrived,  which  was 
celebrated  three  successive  days  and  nights  in  the  Campus  Mar- 
tius,  the  victims  were  consecrated  near  the  bank  of  the  Tiber  at 
Tarentum.      There,  they  sacrificed  to  several  deities;  to  Jupi- 
ter,  Juno,  Apollo,  Latona,  and  to  the  Parcae,  Lucinae,  Ceres, 
Pluto,  and  Proserpine,  which  was  performed  in  this  order.     The 
first  night  that  the  spectacles  were  exhibited,  the  emperor  with 
the  Quindecimviri  sacrificed  three  lambs  on  as  many  altars  pur- 
posely placed  on  the  side  of  the  river,  where  having  sprinkled  the 
altars  with  blood  he  offered  up  the  victims  whole.   Then,  having 
prepared  a  scene  without  a  theatre,  they  placed  a  great  number 
of  lights,  and  made  a  large  fire,  by  which  they  sang  a  new  hymn, 
to  render  the  games  more  solemn.     They  who  performed  these 
ceremonies  were  rewarded  for  their  labour  with  the  first  fruits  of 
their  wheat,  barley,  and  beans.    For  these  were  as  I  stated  distri- 
buted among  the  people.    The  following  day  they  went  up  to  the 
Capitol,  where  the  usual  sacrifices  were  offered,  and  going  from 
thence  to  the  appointed  place,  celebrated  games  in  honour  of 
Apollo  and  Diana.     On  the  next  day,  the  principal  ladies  enter- 
ed the  Capitol  at  the  hour  appointed  by  the  oracle,  where  they  con- 
ducted themselves  with  due  reverence  :  and  at  the  third  hour,  in 
the  temple  of  Apollo  near  the  palace,  twenty-seven  children  of 
each  sex,  whose  parents  were  all  living,  sang  hymns,  and  spoke 
in  Greek  and  Latin  ;  by  which  the  Roman  empire  was  preserved. 
Besides  these,  however,  there  were  other  rites  observed  by  the 
divine  command,  which  as  long  as  they  were  kept  up  preserved 
the  Roman  empire.    And  in  confirmation  of  what  I  have  stated, 
I  will  add  the  oracle  of  the  Sibyl,  which  has  been  mentioned  by 
others  before  my  time  ; 

But  when  an  hundred  years  and  ten  are  past 
Which  is  the  longest  time  man's  age  doth  last* 
Romans !  be  sure  ('t  is  fatal  to  mistake 
In  any  point)  due  offerings  to  make 
To  heaven,  and  see  you  bring  the  sacrifice 
Into  that  field  which  on  the  Tiber  lies: 
And  do  it,  in  that  season,  when  the  night 
Deprives  men  least  of  the  diurnal  light, 
After  sun  set;  Then  to  the  Parcae  pay 
Your  homage ;  and  upon  their  altars  lay 


BOOK  H.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  39 


Young  sheep  and  goats  :  next  the  Lucinae  please, 
With  decent  rites,  who  childing  women  ease, 
Those  finished  offer  a  black  hog  and  sow 
To  Tellus,  for  the  product  of  the  plow, 
But  to  Jove's  altar  bring  the  bulls  milk-white 
For  victims,  in  the  day-time,  not  by  night : 
{For  heavenly  deities  accept  of  none 
But  what  are  offer'd  in  the  day  alone.) 
And  next  to  Juno  sacrifice  a  cow 
Spotless  all  o'er,  and  pure  as  falling  snow, 
Then  let  Apollo,  whom  they  call  the  sun, 
And  Phoebus,  have  his  equal  honours  done. 
Whilst  in  the  temple  Latin  girls  and  boys 
•In  sacred  hymns  make  a  triumphant  noise. 
But  let  them  be  apart,  the  girls  to  stand 
And  sing  on  this,  the  boys  on  t'other  hand : 
Besides  this  caution  I  must  farther  give 
That  all  the  parents  of  them  be  alive. 
As  for  the  married  women,  let  them  pray 
To  Juno  on  their  knees,  that  each  one  may 
Have  their  desire,  both  men  and  women  too, 
But  chiefly  women.     Then,  let  all  of  you 
Bring  from  your  houses  what  is  fit  to  bring,  ^ 
,  (As  the  first-fruits  of  every  useful  thing) 
To  the  immortal  gods  an  offering.  j 

And  let  all  that  upon  your  altars  lie, 
Whence  you  may  men  and  women  both  supply. 
But  to  attend  the  gods  be  sure  there  be 
Both  night  and  day  a  numerous  company 
Of  votaries  both  serious  and  free. 
These  laws  observ'd  not  Latium  alone 
But  Italy's  extent  your  sway  shall  own. 

Experience  assures  us,  that  while  these  ceremonies  were  duly 
performed,  according  to  the  direction  of  the  oracles,  the  empire 
was  secure,  and  likely  to  retain  its  sovereignty  over  almost  all 
the  known  world ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  when  they  were  neg- 
lected, about  the  time  when  Dioclesian  laid  down  the  imperial 
dignity,  it  fell  to  decay,  and  degenerated  insensibly  into  barba- 
rism.  That  I  state  nothing  but  truth  I  will  prove  from  chrono- 
logy. From  the  consulate  of  Chilo  and  Libo,  in  which  Severus 
celebrated  the  secular  games,  or  rites,  to  the  ninth  consulate  of. 
Dioclesian,  and  eighth  of  Maximianus,  was  a  hundred  and  one 
years.  Then  Dioclesian  from  an  emperor  became  a  private  indi- 
vidual, and  Maximianus  followed  his  example.  But  when  Con- 
stantineandLiciriius  were  in  their  third  consulship,  the  110  years 
were  completed,  and  the  festival  ought  to  have  been  kept  ac- 


40  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  n. 


cording  to  custom  ;  but  it  was  neglected,  and  affairs  consequently 
declined  to  their  present  unfortunate  condition. 

Three  years  after  Dioclesian  died,  and  the  reigning  emperors, 
Constantius  and  Maximianus  Gallerius  declared  Severus  and 
Maximinus  (who  was  nephew  to  Gallerius),  the  Caesars,  giving 
all  Italy  to  Severus,  and  the  eastern  provinces  to  Maximinus. 
Affairs  being  all  regulated  and  the  barbarians  quiet,  since  the  Ro- 
mans had  been  so  successful  against  them,  Constantine,  who  was 
the  son  of  Constantius  by  a  concubine,  and  had  previously  an  am- 
bition of  being  emperor  (but  was  more  inflamed  with  that  desire, 
since  Severus  and  Maximinus  had  acquired  the  name  and  honour 
of  Caesars),  was  now  resolved  to  leave  the  place  where  he  had  re- 
sided, and  to  go  to  his  father  Constantine,  who  was  beyond  the 
Alps,  and  generally  in  Britain.  But  being  apprehensive  of  seizure 
by  the  way,  many  persons  being  well  acquainted  of  his  anxiety 
for  dominion,  he  maimed  all  the  horses  that  were  kept  for  pub- 
lic service,  whenever  he  came  to  any  stable  where  they  were  kept, 
except  what  he  took  for  his  own  use.  He  continued  to  do  this 
throughout  his  journey,  by  which  means  he  prevented  those  that 
pursued  him  from  going  further,  while  he  himself  proceeded  to- 
ward the  country  where  his  father  was. 

It  happened  that  Constantius  died  at  that  time;  the  guards, 
therefore,  who  thought  none  of  his  legitimate  children  to  be  fit 
for  the  imperial  dignity,  considered  that  Constantine  was  a  per- 
son capable  of  sustaining  it,  and  conferred  the  honour  upon  him, 
in  hopes  of  being  renumerated  with  handsome  presents.  When 
his  effigy  according  to  custom  was  exhibited  at  Rome,  Maxen- 
tius,  the  son  of  Maximianus  Herculius,  could  not  endure  the  sight 
of  Constantine' s  good  fortune,  who  was  the  son  of  a  harlot,  while 
himself,  who  was  the  son  of  so  great  an  emperor,  remained  at 
home  in  indolence,  and  his  father's  empire  was  enjoyed  by  others. 
He  therefore  associated  with  himself  in  the  enterprise  Marcellianus 
and  Marcellus,  two  military  tribunes,  and  Lucianus,  who  distri- 
buted the  swine's  flesh,  with  which  the  people  of  Rome  were 
provided  by  the  treasury,  and  the  court-guards  called  Praetoriani. 
By  them  he  was  promoted  to  the  imperial  throne,  having  pro- 
mised liberally  to  reward  all  that  assisted  him  in  it.  For  this 
purpose  they  first  murdered  Abellius,  because  he,  being  prefect 
of  the  city,  opposed  their  enterprize. 

Maximianus  Gallerius,  when  he  had  learned  this,  sent  Severus 
Caesar  against  Maxentius  with  an  army.  But  while  he  advanced 
from  Milan  with  several  legions  of  Moors,  Maxentius  corrupted  his 
troops  with  money,  and  even  the  prefect  of  the  court,  Anullinus, 


BOOK  H.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  41 

and  thereby  conquered  him  with  great  ease.  On  which  Severus 
fled  to  Ravenna,  which  is  a  strong  and  populous  city,  provided 
with  necessaries  sufficient  for  himself  and  soldiers.  When  Max- ' 
imianus  Herculius  knew  this,  he  was  doubtless  greatly  concerned 
for  his  son  Maxentius,  and  therefore,  leaving  Lucania  where  he 
then  was,  he  went  to  Ravenna.  Finding  that  Severus  could  not  by 
any  means  be  forced  out  of  this  city,  it  being  well  fortified,  and 
stored  with  provisions,  he  deluded  him  with  false  oaths,  and  per- 
suaded him  to  go  to  Rome.  But  on  his  way  thither,  coming  to  a 
place  called  the  Three  Tabernae,  he  was  taken  by  a  stratagem  of 
Maxentius  and  immediately  executed.  Maximianus  Gallerius 
could  not  patiently  endure  these  injuries  done  to  Severus,  and 
therefore  resolved  to  go  from  the  east  to  Rome,  and  to  punish 
Maxentius  as  he  deserved.  On  his  arrival  in  Italy,  he  found  the 
soldiers  about  him  so  treacherous,  that  he  returned  into  the  east, 
without  fighting  a  battle. 

At  this  period  Maximianus  Herculius,  who  lamented  the  tu- 
mults which  disturbed  the  public  peace,  came  to  Dioclesian, 
who  then  lived  at  Carnutum,  a  town  of  Gallia  Celtica,  and  en- 
deavoured to  persuade  him  to  resume  the  empire,  and  not  to  suf- 
fer the  government  which  they  had  preserved  so  long  and  with 
so  much  difficulty  to  be  exposed  to  the  madness  and  folly  of 
those  who  had  possessed  themselves  of  it,  and  who  had  already 
brought  it  near  to  ruin. '  But  Dioclesian  refused  to  listen  to  him; 
for  he  wisely  preferred  his  own  quiet,  and  perhaps  foresaw  the 
troubles  that  would  ensue,  being  a  man  weft  versed  in  mattery 
of  religion.  Herculius  therefore,,  perceiving  that  he  could  not 
prevail  with  him,  came  to  Ravenna,  and  so  returned  to  the  Alps 
to  meet  Constantine,  who  lay  there.  And  ^eing  naturally  a 
busy  faithless  man,  he  promised  his  daughter  Fausta  to  Con- 
stantine, which  he  performed,  but  persuaded  him  to  pursue 
Maximianus  Gallerius,  who  was  then  leaving  Italy,  and  to  lay 
wait  for  Maxentius.  To  all  which  Constantine  agreed.  He 
then  left  him,  designing  if  possible  to  recover  the  empire,  as  he 
hoped  to  create  a  quarrel  between  Constantine  and  his  son  Maxen- 
tius. But  while  he  attempted  these  things,  Maximianus  Gallerius 
assumed  Licinius,  as  his  colleague  in  the  empire,  with  whose  as- 
sistance he  hoped  to  cope  with  Maxentius.  But  while  Galle- 
rius deliberated  on  these  affairs,  he  died  of  an  incurable  wound, 
'and  Licinius  then  also  claimed  the  sole  dominion.  Maximianus 
Herculius  endeavoured,  as  I  have  said,  to  recover  the  empire  by- 
alienating  the  soldiers  from  Maxentius.  For  which  purpose,  by 
gifts  and  insinuating  addresses,  having  brought  them  over  to  him, 

VOL.    1.    NO.    1.  E 


42  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  n. 

he  endeavoured  to  form  a  conspiracy  against  Constantine,  in  which 
his  soldiers  were  to  join.  But  Fausta  revealed  it  to  Constantine, 
and  Herculius,  wbsfwas  now  overborne  by  so  many  disappoint- 
ments, died  of  a  distemper  at  Tarsus. 

Maxentius,  having  escaped  this  danger,  and  being  of  opinion 
that  he  was  now  well  enough  established  in  the  empire,  sent  per- 
sons into  Africa,  and  in  particular  to  Carthage,  to  carry  his  image 
about  that  country.  But  the  soldiers  in  that  country  forbade  it, 
out  of  regard  to  Maximianus  Gallerius,  and  the  respect  they  had 
for  his  memory,  until  they  heard  that  Maxentius  was  coining  to 
make  war  on  them  on  the  plea  of  an  insurrection.  They  then 
•went  to  Alexandria,  but  meeting  with  a  great  army  with  which 
they  were  not  able  to  contend,  they  returned  to  Carthage.  Max- 
entius, being  disturbed  at  this,  resolved  to  sail  for  Africa,  and  to 
punish  the  authors  of  the  commotion.  But  the  soothsayers  hav- 
.  ing  sacrificed  and  given  him  ill  omens,  he  was  afraid  to  go,  not 
only  because  the  entrails  had  that  appearance,  but  also  lest  Alex- 
ander, who  was  prefect  of  the  court  in  Africa,  should  be  his  ene- 
my. To  secure  his  passage  thither  from  all  doubt,  he  sent  to 
Alexander,  desiring  him  to  send  his  son  as  an  hostage.  But  he, 
suspecting  that  Maxentius  did  not  desire  his  son  for  the  mere  pur- 
pose of  an  hostage,  but  to  deceive  him,  denied  the  request.  After 
this,  Maxentius  sending  other  agents  to  him  to  take  him  off  by 
treachery  and  stratagem,  the  plot  was  discovered  ;  and  the  soldiers, 
having  then  got  a  favourable  opportunity  to  rebel,  conferred  the 
purple  robe  on  Alexander,  -though  he  was  by  birth  not  only  a 
Phrygian,  but  a  timid  cowardly  man,  and  unfit  for  any  difficult 
undertaking,  and  was,  moreover,  of  an  advanced  age. 

At  that  time  a  fire  happened  at  Rome  ;  whether  it  came  out 
of  the  air  or  earth  is  uncertain.  It  broke  out  in  the  temple  of 
Fortune ;  and  while  the  people  ran  to  extinguish  it,  a  soldier, 
speaking  blasphemy  against  the  goddess,  was  killed  by  the  mob 
out  of  zeal,  by  which  a  mutiny  was  occasioned  among  the  sol- 
diers. They  would  have  destroyed  the  whole  city,  had  not  Max- 
entius soon  appeased  their  rage.  Maxentius  after  this  sought  every 
occasion  to  make  war  on  Constantine,  and  pretending  grief  for 
his  father's  death,  of  which  Constantine  was  the  cause,  he  de- 
signed to  go  towards  Rhaetia,  which  is  contiguous  both  to  Gaul 
and  Illyricum.  For  he  imagined  that  he  should  subdue  Dalma- 
tia  and  Illyricum,  by  the  assistance  of  the  generals  in  those  parts, 
and  of  the  army  of  Licinius.  But  thinking  it  better  first  to  ar- 
range affairs  in  Africa,  he  raised  an  army,  bestowing  the  com- 
mand of  it  on  Rufius  Volusianus,  prefect  of  the  court,  and  sent 


BOOK  ii.  OF   ZOSIMUS.  43 

them  into  Africa.  He  sent  Zeno  also  along  with  Rufius,  who  was 
a  person  not  only  expert  in  military  affairs,  but  esteemed  for  his 
courtesy  and  affability.  On  the  first  charge,,  Alexander's  troops 
retired  on  a  body  of  men  in  the  rear,  nor  was  the-other  party  left 
unconquered  by  the  enemy.  Alexander  himself  was  taken  and 
strangled. 

The  war  being  thus  at  an  end,  a  good  opportunity  was  afforded 
to  sycophants  and  informers  of  impeaching  all  the  persons  in 
Africa,  who  had  good  estates,  as  friends  to  Alexander  :  nor  were 
any  t)f  the  accused  spared,  but  some  of  them  put  to  death,  and 
others  deprived  of  all  their  possessions.  After  this  he  triumphed 
at  Rome  for  the  mischief  done  at  Carthage.  Such  was  the 
state  of  the  affairs  of  Maxentius,  who  conducted  himself  with 
cruelty  and  licentiousness  towards  all  the  inhabitants  of  Italy, 
and  even  to  Rome  itself.  Meantime  Constantine,  who  had  long 
been  jealous  of  him,  was  then  much  more  disposed  to  contention. 
Having  therefore  raised  an  army  amongst  the  Barbarians,  Germans, 
and  Celts,  whom  he  had  conquered,  and  likewise  drawn  a  force 
out  of  Britain,  amounting  in  the  whole  to  ninety  thousand  foot 
and  eight  thousand  horse,  he  marched  from  the  Alps  into  Italy, 
passing  those  towns  that  surrendered  without  doing  them  any  da- 
mage, but  taking  by  storm  those  which  resisted.  While  he  was 
making  this  progress,  Maxentius  had  collected  a  much  stronger 
army  ;  consisting  of  eighty  thousand  Romans  and  Italians,  all  the 
Tuscans  on  the  sea  coast,  forty  thousand  men  from  Carthage,  be- 
sides what  the  Sicilians  sent  him  ;  his  whole  force  amounting  to  a 
hundred  and  seventy  thousand  foot  and  eighteen  thousand  horse. 

Both  being  thus  prepared,  Maxentius  threw  a  bridge  over  the 
Tiber,  which  was  not  of  one  entire  piece,  but  divided  into  two 
parts,  the  centre  of  the  bridge  being  made  to  fasten  with  irons, 
wUich  might' be  drawn  out  upon  occasion.  He  gave  orders  to  the 
workmen,  that  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  army  of  Constantine  upon 
the  juncture  of  the  bridge,  they  should  draw  out  the  iron  fasten- 
ings, that  the  enemy  who  stood  upon  it  might  fall  into  the  river. 

Constantine,  advancing  with  his  army  to  Rome,  encamped  in 
a  field  before  the  city,  which  was  broad  and  therefore  convenient 
for  cavalry.  Maxentius  in  the  mean  time  shut  himself  up  within 
the  walls,  and  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and,  moreover,  consulted  the 
Sibylline  oracles  concerning  the  event  of  the  war.  Finding  a  pre- 
diction, that  whoever  designed  any  harm  to;the  Romans  should 
die  a  miserable  death,  he  applied  it  to  himself,  because  he  with- 
stood those  that  came  against  Rome,  and  wished  to  take  it.  His 
application  indeed  proved  just.  For  when  Maxeptius  drew  out 


44  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  n. 

his  army  before  the  city,  and  was  marching  over  the  bridge  that 
he  himself  had  constructed,  an  infinite  number  of  owls  flew  down 
and  covered  the  wall.  When  Constanine  saw  this,  he  ordered  his 
men  to  stand  to  their  arms.  And  the  two  armies  being  drawn  up 
opposite  to  each  other,  Constantine  sent  his  cavalry  against  that 
of  the  enemy,  whom  they  charged'  with  such  impetuosity  that 
they  threw  them  into  disorder.  The  signal  being  given  to  the  in- 
fantry, they  likewise  marched  in  good  order  towards  the  enemy. 
A  furious  battle  having  commenced,  the  Romans  themselves,  and 
their  foreign  allies,  were  unwilling  to  risk  their  lives,  as  they  wish- 
ed for  deliverance  from  the  bitter  tyranny  with  which  they  were 
burdened ;  though  the  other  troops  were  slain  in  great  numbers, 
being  either  trod  to  death  by  the  horse,  or  killed  by  the  foot. 

As  long  as  the  cavalry  kept  their  ground,  Maxentius  retained 
some  hopes,  but  when  they  gave  way,  he  fled  with  the  rest  over 
the  bridge  into  the  city.  The  beams  not  being  strong  enough 
to  bear  so  great  a  weight,  they  broke;  and  Maxentius,  with  the 
others,  was  carried  with  the  stream  down  the  river. 

When  the  news  of  this  victory  was  reported  in  the  city,  none 
dared  to  shew  any  joy  for  what  had  happened,  because  many 
thought  it  was  an  unfounded  report.  But  when  the  head  of  Max- 
entius was  brought  upon  a  spear,  their  fear  and  dejection  were 
changed  to  joy  and  pleasure.  On  this  occasion  Constantine  punish- 
ed very  few,  and  they  were  only  some  few  of  the  nearest  friends  of 
Maxentius ;  but  he  abolished  the  praetorian  troops,  and  destroyed 
the  fortresses  in  which  they  used  to  reside.  At  length,  having  ar- 
ranged all  things  in  the  city,  he  went  towards  Gallia  Celtica  ; 
and  on  his  way  sent  for  Licinius  to  Milan,  and  gave  him  in  mar- 
riage his  sister  Constantia,  whom  he  had  formerly  promised  him, 
when  he  wished  him  to  unite  with  himself  against  Maxentius. 
That  solemnity  over,  Constantine  proceeded  towards  the  Celtae. 
It  was  not  long  before  a  civil  war  broke  out  between  Licinius  and 
Maximianus,  who  had  a  severe  engagement,  in  which  Licinius 
at  first  appeared  to  have  the  disadvantage,  but  he  presently  ral- 
lied and  put  Maximianus  to  flight.  This  emperor,  travelling 
through  the  east  into  Egypt,  in  hopes  of  raising  a  force  to  renew 
the  war,  died  at  Tarsus. 

The  empire  being  thus  devolved  on  Constantine  and  Licinius, 
they  soon  quarrelled.  Not  because  Licinius  gave  any  cause 
for  it,  but  that  Constantine,  in  his  usual  manner,  was  unfaith- 
ful to  his  agreement,  by  endeavouring  to  alienate  from  Licinius 
some  nations  that  belonged  to  his  dominions.  By  this  means 
an  open  rupture  ensued,  and  both  prepared  for  war,  Licinius 


BOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


took  up  his  head-quarters  at  Cibalis,  a  city  of  Pannonia,  which 
stands  on  a  hill  ;  the  road  to  which  is  rugged  and  narrow.  The 
greatest  part  of  this  road  is,  through  a  deep  morass,  and  the  re- 
mainder up  a  mountain,  on  which  stands  the  city.  Below  it  ex- 
tends a  spacious  plain,  which  entertains  the  view  with  a  boundless 
prospect.  On  this  Licinius  fixed  his  camp,  and  extended  the  body 
of  his  army  under  the  hill,  that  his  flanks  might  be  protected 
from  the  enemy.  ,  Constantine  in  the  meantime  drew  up  his  men 
near  the  mountain,  placing  the  horse  in  front,  thinking  that  to  be 
the  best  disposition  lest  the  enemy  should  fall  upon  the  foot,  who 
moved  but  slowly,  and  hinder  their  advance.  Having  done  this, 
he  immediately  gave  the  charge,  and  attacked  the  enemy.  This 
engagement  was  one  of  the  most  furious  that  was  ever  fought  ; 
for  when  each  side  had  expended  their  darts,  they  fought  a  long 
time  with  spears  and  javelins;  and  after  the  action  had  continued 
from  morning  to  night,  the  right  wing,  where  Constantine  him- 
self commanded,  began  to  prevail.  The  enemy  being  routed, 
Licinius's  troops,  seeing  him  mounted  .and  ready  to  fly,  dared 
not  stay  to  eat  their  portions,  but  left  behind  them  all  their 
cattle  and  provisions,  taking  only  as  much  food  as  would  suffice 
for  one  night,  and  marched  with  great  precipitation  along  with 
Licinius  to  Sirmium,  a  city  of  Pannonia,  by  which  runs  a  river 
which  discharges  itself  into  the  Tster.  In  passing  this  town  he 
broke  down  the  bridge  over  the  river,  and  marched  on  with  an 
intention  to  levy  troops  in  Thrace. 

Constantine,  having  taken  Cibalis,  and  Sirmium,  and  all  the 
towns  that  Licinius  had  abandoned,  sent  five  thousand  men  in 
pursuit  of  him.  But  as  these  were  ignorant  of  the  course  he  had 
taken,  they  could  not  overtake  him.  Constantine  however,  hav- 
ing rebuilt  the  bridge  over  theSaus,  which  Liciuius  had  broken 
down,  was  with  his  army  almost  at  his  heels.  Having  entered 
Thrace,-  he  arrived  at  the  plain  where  Licinius  lay  encamped. 
On  the  night  of  his  arrival  there  he  marshalled  his  army,  and 
gave  orders  for  his  soldiers  to  be  ready  for  battle  by  day-break. 
As  soon  as  it  was  light,  Licinius,  perceiving  Constantine  with 
his  army,  drew  up  his  forces  also,  having  been  joined  by  Valens, 
whom  he  styled  Cuesar,  after  the  battle  of  Cibalis.  When  the 
armies  engaged,  they  first  fought  with  bows  at  a  distance  ;  but 
when  their  arrows  were  spent,  they  began  to  use  their  javelins 
and  poignards.  Thus  the  battle  continued  very  obstinately  for 
a  considerable  time,  until  those  whom  Constantine  had  sent  in 
pursuit  of  Licinius  descended  from  an  eminence  upon  the  ar^ 
tujes  while  they  were  engaged.  These  wheeled  round  the  hill 


46  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  n. 

before  they  arrived  at  them,  deeming  it  best  to  join  their  own 
party  from  the  higher  ground,  and  to  encompass  the  enemy. 
The  troops  of  Licinius,  being  aware  of  them,  courageously  with- 
stood against  them  all,  so  that  many  thousands  were  slain  on  both 
sides,  and  the  advantage  was  equal,  till  the  signal  was  given  for 
both  to  retire.  Next  day  they  agreed  on  a  truce,  and  entered 
into  an  alliance  with  each  other,  on  condition  that  Constantine 
should  possess  Illyricum  and  all  the  nations  \vestward,  and  that 
Licinius  should  have  Thrace  and  the. east;  but  that  Valens, 
whom  Licinius  had  made  Caesar,  should  be  put  to  death,  because 
he  was  said  to  be  the  author  of  all  the  mischief  which  had  hap- 
pened. Having  done  this,  and  sworn  on  both  sides  to  observe 
the  conditions,  Constantine  conferred  the  rank  and  title  of  Caesar 
on  Crispus,  his  son  by  a  concubine  called  Minervina,  who  was  as 
yet  but  a  youth,  and  on  Constantine,  who  was  born  but  a  few  days 
before  at  Arelatum.  At  the  same  time  Licinianus,  the  son  of 
Licinius,  who  was  twenty  years  of  age,  was  declared  Caesar. 
Thus  ended  the  second  war. 

Constantine  hearing  that  the  Sauromata?,  who  dwelt  near  the 
Palus  Maeotis,  had  passed  the  Isterin  boats,  and  pillaged  his  ter- 
ritories, led  his  army  against  them,  and  was  met  by  the  barba- 
rians, under  their  king  Rausimodus.  The  Sauromatae  attacked  a 
town  which  was  sufficiently  garrisoned,  but  its  wall  was  built 
in  the  lower  part  of  stone,  and  in  the  upper  part  of  wood.  They 
therefore  thought  that  they  might  easily  take  the  town  by  burn- 
ing all  the  Avooden  part  of  the  wall ;  and  with  that  view  set  it 
on  fire,  and  in  the  mean  time  shot  at  those  who  stood  on  the  walls. 
The  defenders  threw  down  darts  and  stones  upon  the  barbarians, 
and  killed  many  of  them  ;  and  Constantine  then  coming  up  and 
falling  on  them  from  a  higher  ground,  slew  a  great  number,  took 
more  alive,  and  put  the  rest  to  flight.  Rausimodus,  having  lost 
the  greater  part  of  his  army,  took  shipping  and  crossed  the  Ister, 
with  an  intention  of  once  more  plundering  the  Roman  dominions. 
Constantine,  hearing  of  his  design,  followed  them  over  the  Ister, 
and  attacked  them  in  a  thick  wood  upon  a  hill,  to  which  they 
had  fled,  where  he  killed  many  of  them,  amongst  whom  was 
Rausimodus.  He  alsp  took  many  of  them  prisoners,  giving  quar- 
ter to  those  that  would  submit ;  and  returned  to  his  head-quarters 
with  an  immense  number  of  captives.  These  he  distributed  into 
the  different  cities,  and  then  came  to  Thessalonica,  where  having 
constructed  a  harbour  (this  city  not  possessing  one  before),  he  made 
new  preparations  for  war  against  Licinius.  For  this  purpose,  he 
fitted  out  two  hundred  galleys  of  war ;  each  with  thirty  oars. 


BOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  47 

besides  two  thousand  transport  vessels,  and  raised  a  force  of  a 
hundred  and  twenty  thousand  foot,  and  ten  thousand  horsemen  and 
sailors.  Licinius,  hearing  of  the  great  preparations  of  Constantine, 
sent  messengers  to  every  nation,  commanding  them  to  prepare  a 
sufficient  number  of  men  for  the  navy,  besides  horse  and  foot  sol- 
diers. The  Egyptians  therefore  sent  out  eighty  galleys,  the  Phoe- 
nicians an  equal  number,  the  lonians  and  Dorians  of  Asia  sixty, 
the  Cyprians  thirty,  the  Carians  twenty,  the  Bithynians  thirty, 
and  the  Africans  fifty.  His  foot-soldiers  amounted  to  nearly  a 
hundred  and  fifty  thousand,  but  his  horse  onlyto  fifteen  thousand, 
which  were  sent  to  him  from  Phrygia  and  Cappadocia.  Constau- 
tine's  navy  lay  at  Piraeus,  that  of  Licinius  in  the  Hellespont.  When 
they  had  thus  established  their  naval  and  military  forces,  Lici- 
nius encamped  at  Adrianople  in  Thrace,  whilst  Constantine  sent 
for  his  navy  from  Piraeus,  which  was  built  and  manned  chiefly  in 
Greece.  Advancing  with  his  infantry  from  Thessalonica,  he  en- 
camped on  the  bank  of  the  rivev  "Hebrus,  which  runs  to  the  leTt 
of  Adrianople.  At  the  same  time,  Licinius  drew  up  his  army  in 
order  of  battle,  extending  from  a  mountain  which  is  above  the 
town  two  hundred  stadia,  as  far  as  the  junction  of  another  river 
with  the  Hebrus;  thus  the  armies  continued  opposite  to  each 
other  for  several  days.  Constantine,  observing  where  the  river 
was  least  broad,  concerted  this  plan.  He  ordered  his  men  to 
bring  trees  from  the  mountain,  and  to  tie  ropes  around  them,  as 
if  he  intended  to  throw  a  bridge  over  the  river  for  the  passage  of 
his  army.  By  this  stratagem  he  deluded  the  enemy,  and,  ascend- 
ing a  hill  on  which  were  thick  woods  sufficient  to  conceal  any 
that  were  in  them,  he  planted  there  five  thousand  archers  and 
eight  hundred  horse.  Having  done  this,  he  crossed  the  Hebrus 
at  the  narrowest  place,  and  so  surprised  the  enemy  that  many 
fled  with  all  their  speed,  while  others,  who  were  amazed  at  his 
unexpected  approach,  were  struck  with  wonder  at  his  coming 
over  so  suddenly.  In  the  meantime,  the  rest  of  his  army  crossed 
the  river  in  security,  and  a  great  slaughter  commenced.  Nearly 
thirty  thousand  fell ;  and  about  sunset  Constantine"  took  their 
camp,  while  Licinius,  with  all  the  forces  he  could  muster,  has* 
tened  through  Thrace  to  his  ships. 

As  soon  as  day  appeared,  the  whole  army  of  Licinius,  or  as 
many  of  them  as  had  fled  to  the  neighbouring  mountains  and  val- 
lies,  together  with  those  that  Licinius  through  haste  had  left  be- 
hind him,  surrendered  themselves  to  Constantine.  Licinius  being 
arrived  at  Byzantium,  Constantine  followed  and  besieged  him 
in  that  city.  His  navy,  as  before  related,  had  now  left  Piraeus  and 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  11. 


lay  at  Macedon.  He  therefore  sent  orders  to  his  admirals  to 
bring  the  ships  into  the  Hellespont.  This  being  effected  accord- 
ing to  the  com  mat  Al  of  Constantine,  the  officers  of  his  navy 
thought  it  not  prudent  to  engage  with  more  than  eighty  of  their 
best  sailing  vessels,  which  were  gallies  of  thirty  oars  each,  be- 
cause the  place  was  too  narrow  for  the  reception  of  a  greater 
number.  Upon  which  Abantus,  the  admiral  of  Licinius,  making 
use  of  two  hundred  ships,  despised  the  smallness  of  the  enemy's 
fleet,  which  he  thought  he  could  easily  surround.  But  the  sig- 
nals on  both  sides  being  given,  and  the  vessels  meeting  stern  to 
stern,  the  seamen  of  Constantine  managed  their  ships  so  as  to  en- 
gage in  good  order;  but  the  ships  of  Abantus,  sailing  against  the 
enemy  without  any  order,  and  being  confined  by  the  narrowness 
of  the  place,  became  exposed  to  the  enemy,  who  sunk  and  other- 
wise destroyed  them.  Many  were  thrown  overboard  ;  till  at  length 
night  put  an  end  to  the  engagement.  The  fleets  then  separated 
and  put  in  at  different  places,  the  one  at  Eleus  in  Thrace,  and  the 
•other  at  the  ^Eantian  harbour.  The  following  day,  the  wind 
blowing  hard  from  the  north,  Abantus  put  out  from  the  ^Eantian 
port  and  prepared  for  action.  But  the  galleys  of  fifty  oars  being 
come  to  Kleus  by  order  of  the  admirals,  Abantus  was  alarmed  at 
the  number  of  vessels,  and  hesitated  whether  to  sail  against  the 
enemy.  About  noon  the  north  wind  subsided;  the  south  wind 
then  blew  with  such  violence,  that  the  ships  of  Licinius,  which, 
lay  on  the  Asiatic  coast,  were  some  driven  on  shore,  others  broken 
against  the  rocks,  and  others  foundered  with  all  on  board.  In 
this  affair  five  thousand  men  perished,  together  with  a  hundred 
and  thirty  ships  filled  with  men,  whom  Licinius  had  sent  out  of 
Thrace  to  Asia  accompanied  by  a  part  of  his  army;  Byzantium 
being  too  small  to  contain  all  that  were  besieged  with  Licinius. 
The  sea-fight  being  thus  concluded,  Abantus  effected  his  escape 
with  only  four  ships  into  Asia.  The  navy  of  Constantine,  having 
arrived  in  the  Hellespont  laden  with  abundance  of  provisions  and 
stores  for  his  troops,  weighed  anchor  in  order  to  join  in  the  siege 
of  Byzantium,  and  to  blockade  the  city  by  sea.  The  foot-soldiers 
of  Licinius,  being  alarmed  at  the  sight  of  such  a  navy,  procured 
ships  in  which  -they  sailed  to  Eleus. 

Meantime  Constantine  continued  intent  upon  the  siege,  and 
raised  a  mound  of  equal  height  with  the  wall,  on  which  he  placed 
wooden  towers  that  overlooked  the  wall,  from  which  his  soldiers 
shot  those  who  defended  it,  in  order  that  he  might  with  greater 
security  bring  battering  rams  and  other  engines  of  war  near  it. 
By  these  means  he  thought  himself  sure  to  take  the  city.  At 


HOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  49 

which  Licinius,  being  terrified,  and  not  knowing  how  to  act,  re- 
solved to  leave  Byzantium,  and  the  weaker  part  of  his  army  there- 
in, and  to  take  with  him  only  such  men  as  were  fit  for  active  ser- 
vice, and  had  given  proofs  of  their  attachment  to  himself,  and  to 
hasten  without  delay  to  Chalcedon  in  Bithynia.  He  flattered  him- 
self that  another  army  might  be  raised  in  Asia,  which  would  ena- 
ble him  again  to  contend  with  his  adversary.  Arriving  therefore 
at  Chalcedon,  and,  having  appointed  Martinianus  to  the  command 
of  the  court  guards,  whom  the  Romans  call  Magister  officiorum, 
his  associate  in  this  dangerous  enterprize,  he  declared  him  Caesar, 
and  sent  him  with  an  army  to  Lampsacus,  to  hinder  the  passage  of 
the  enemy  from  Thrace  into  the  Hellespont.  He  posted  his  own 
men  on  the  hills  and  passes  about  Chalcedon, 

While  Licinius  was  thus  occupied,  Constantine,  who  had  a 
great  number  of  transports  as  well  as  warlike  vessels,  and  was 
desirous  to  make  use  of  them  in  crossing  over  and  possessing 
himself  of  the  opposite  shore,  fearing  that  the  Bithynian  coast 
might  be  inaccessible  to  ships  of  burden,  immediately  con- 
structed some  small  vessels,  with  which  he  sailed  to  the  sacred 
promontory,  which  lies  at  the  entrance  of  the  Pontus,  two  hun- 
dred stadia  from  Chalcedon.  He  there  landed  his  army,  which, 
having  done,  he  drew  them  up  upon  some  adjacent  hills.  Licinius, 
though  he  then  saw  that  Bithynia  was  already  in  the  hands  of 
his  enemy,  was  rendered  so  desperate  by  danger,  that  he  sent  for 
Martinianus  from  Lampsacus,  and  in  order  to  encourage  his  men 
to  fight,  told  them  that  he  himself  would  lead  them.  Having  said 
what  he  thought  necessary  to  encourage  them,  he  drew  them  up 
in  order  of  battle,  and  marching  out  of  the  city,  met  the  enemy, 
who  were  prepared  for  him.  A  sharp  engagement  taking  place 
between  Chalcedon  and  the  sacred  promontory,  Constantine 
had  the  superiority;  for  he  fell  on  the  enemy^with  such  resolu- 
tion, that  of  a  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  men,  scarcely  thirty 
thousand  escaped.  When  the  Byzantines  heard  of  this,  they  im- 
mediately threw  open  their  gates  to  Constantine,  as  did  the  Chal- 
cedonians  also.  Licinius  after  this  defeat  went  to  Nicomedw 
with  what  horse  were  left  him,  and  a  few  thousands  ot  foot. 

At  this  time  a  Persian  named  Hormisdas,  of  the  royal  family, 
came  over  to  Constantine  for  refuge,  under  these  circumstances. 
His  father  had  been  king  of  Persia.  He  was  once  celebrating  his 
own  birth-day  after  the  Persian  manner,  when  Hormisdas  entered 
the  palace,  bringing  with  him  a  large  quantity  of  venison.  But 
as  the  guests  at  the  table  did  not  rise,  and  pay  him  the  respect  and 
honour  due  to  him,  he  became  enraged,  and  told  them  he  would 

VOL.    1.    NO.    1.  G 


^  THE  HISTORY. BOOK  "• 

punish  them  with  the  death  of  Marsy  as.  This  say  ing  most  of  them 
did  not  understand,  because  it  related  to  a  foreign  story;  but  one 
of  them,  who  had  lived  in  Phrygia,  and  had  heard  the  story  of 
Marsyas,  explained  to  them  the  meaning  of  Hormisdas's  menace, 
while  they  sat  at  table.    It  was  therefore  so  treasured  up  in  their 
recollection,  that  when  his  father   died,  they  remembered  his 
threat,  and  chose  his  younger  brother  king,  though  according  to 
law  the  elder  should  be  preferred  above  the  other  children.    Not 
contented  with  that,  thay  put  Hormisdas  in  chains,  and  confined 
him  on  a  hill  which  lies  before  their  city.     But  after  some  time 
had  elapsed,  his  wife  effected  his  escape  in  this  manner.     She 
procured  a  large  fish,  and  put  a  file  in  its  belly,  and,  sewing  it  up 
ngain,  delivered  it  to  the  most  trusty  of  her  eunuchs,  charging 
him  to  tell  Hormisdas,  that  he  must  eat  the  fish  when  no  one 
was  present,  and  use  what  he  should  find  in  its  belly  for   his 
escape.     When  she  had  formed  this  contrivance,  she  sent  several 
camels  loaded  with  wine,  and  abundance  of  meat,  to  entertain  her 
husband's  keepers.    While  they  were  enjoying  the  feast  she  gave 
them,  Hormisdas  cut  open  the  fish,  and  found  the  file;  having 
with  that  filed  off  the  shackles  from  his  legs,  he  put  on  the  robe 
of  the  eunuch,  and  passed  through  the  midst  of  his  keepers,  who 
were  by  that  time  perfectly  intoxicated.  Taking  one  of  the  eunuchs 
along,  with  him,  he  fled  to  the  king  of  Armenia,  who  was  his 
particular  friend.    By  these  means  he  got  safe  to  Constantine, 
who  shewed  him  all  possible  kindness  and  respect. 

But  Licinius  being  besieged  by  Constantine  at  Nicomedia  also, 
knew  not  what  to  do,  being  sensible  that  he  had  not  an  army  equal 
to  engage.  Going,  therefore,  out  of  the  city,  he  submitted  himself 
to  Constantine,  and  brought  him  the  purple  robe,  proclaiming  him 
his  emperor  and  lord,  and  intreating  pardon  for  what  was  past/  He 
presumed  that  he  certainly  should  escape  with  life,  because  Con- 
stantine  had  sworn  to  his  wife  that  he  would  spare  him.  But  Con- 
stantine delivered  Martinianus  to  the  guards  that  they  might  .put 
him  to  death,  and  sent  Licinius  to  Thessalonica,  as  if  he  were  to 
live  there  in  security.  However,  he  afterwards  broke  his  oath,* 
which  was  usual  with  Constantine,  and  caused  him  to  be  executed. 

*  If  what  others  say  of  Constantine  be  true,  Zosimus  has  no  reason  to  im- 
pute to  him  the  crime  of  perjury  ;  for  he  did  not  seem  so  much  to  break  an 
oath  or  promise,  as  to  punish  the  violation  of  it  in  Licinius,  who,  after  Con- 
stantine had  gained  so  many  victories,  when  he  was  reduced  to  a  very  low 
condition,  omitted  no  opportunity  of  recovering  the  empire,  of  which  he  had 
^beco  deprived  by  the  just  sentence  of  victory,  but  contrived  all  methods  of 
making  ill  returns  for  the  kindness  of  Euergetes ;  Euseb,  Life  of  Constantine, 
1.  i.  c.  43.  and  T heodor,  L  i.  c.  7.  To  which  this  may  likewise  be  added, 


BOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  51 

Now  that  the  whole  empire  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Con- 
stantine,  he  no  longer  concealed_his^evil4i&pe&Uion  and  vicious 
inclinations,  but  acted  as  he  pleased,  without  controul.  He  in- 
deed used  the  ancient  worship  .of  his  country*  ;  though  not  so 
much  out  of  honour  or  veneration  as  of  necessity.  Therefore  he 
believed  the  soothsayers,  who  were  expert  in  their  art,  as  men  who 
predicted  the  truth  concerning  all  the  great  actions  which  he 
ever  performed.  But  when  he  came  to  Rome,  he  was  filled  with 
pride  and  arrogance.  He  resolved  to  begin  his  impious  actions 
at  home.  For  he  put  to  death  his  son  Crispus,  stilecl  (as  I  men- 
tioned) Cffisar,  on  suspicion  of  debauching  his  mother-in-law 
Fausta,  without  any  regard  to  the  ties  of  nature.  And  when  his 
own  mother  Helena  expressed  much  sorrow  for  this  atrocity,  la- 
menting the  young  man's  deaih  with  great  bitterness,  Constantine 
under  pretence  of  comforting  her,  applied  a  remedy  worse  than 
the  disease.  For  causing  a  bath  to  be  heated  to  an  extraordinary 
degree,  he  shut  up  Fausta  in  it,  and  a  short  time  after  took  her 
out  dead.  Of  which  his  conscience  ^accusing  him,  as  also  of  vio- 
lating his  oath,  he  went  to  the  priests  to  be  purified  from  his 
crimes.  But  they  told  him,  that  there  was  no  kind  of  lustration 
that  was  sufficient  to  clear  him  of  such  enormities.  A  Spaniard, 
named  JBgyptius,  very  familiar  with  the  court-ladies,  being  at 
Rome,  happened  to  fall  into  converse  with  Constantine,  and  as- 
sured him,  that  the  Christian  doctrine  would  teach  him  how  to 
cleanse  himself  from  all  his  offences,  and  that  they  who  received  it 
were  immediately  absolved  from  all  their  sins.  Constantine  had  no 
sooner  heard  this  than  he  easily  believed  what  was  told  him,  and 
forsaking  the  rites  of  his  country,  received  those  which  ^Egyptius 
offered  him;  and  for  the  first  instance  of  his  impiety,  suspected 
the  truth  of  divination.  For  since  many  fortunate  occurrences 
had  been  thereby  predicted  to  him,  and  really  had  happened  ac- 
cording to  such  prediction,  he  was  afraid  that  others  might  be  told 
something  which  should  fall  out  to  his  misfortune  ;  and  for  that 

that  Licinius  hated  the  Christians  as  much  as  Constantine  esteemed  them, 
•who  consequently  could  not  endure  to  see  those  exposed  to  injury  whom  he 
favoured.  Nor  should  any  one  object,  that  these  authors  are  not  to  be  credited, 
because  they  were  partial ;  since  Zosimus  himself  cannot  be  excused  in  that 
particular,  being  an  inveterate  enemy  to  Christianity,  and  a  violent  bigot  to 
the  heathenish  superstition. 

*  Among  the  Imperial  laws  or  edicts,  is  one  which  Eusebius  mentions,  1. 
x.  c.  5.  "  That  every  one  may  apply  himself  to  that  mode  of  worship  he  thinks 
suitable  to  his  own  reason."  And  therefore,  though  he  did  not  abolish  the  old 
heathen  institutions  of  his  country  at  that  time,  ye  he  favoured  the  Christians 
most,  and  gave  them  liberty,  of  which  almost  all  the  former  emperors,  used 
to  deprive  them. 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  11. 


reason  applied  himself  to  the  abolishing  of  the  practice.  And  on 
a  particular  festival,  when  the  army  was  to  go  up  to  the  Capitol, 
he  very  indecently  reproached  the  solemnity,  and  treading  the 
holy  ceremonies,  as  it  were,  under  his  feet,  incurred  the  hatred 
of  the  senate  and  people*. 

Being  unable  to  endure  the  curses  of  almost  the  whole  city,  he 
sought  for  another  city  as  large  as  Rome,  where  he  might  build 
himself  a  palace.  Having,  therefore,  discovered  a  convenient 
scite  between  Troas  and  old  Ilium,  he  there  accordingly  laid 
a  foundation,  and  built  part  of  a  wall  to  a  considerable  height, 
which  may  still  be  seen  by  any  that  sail  towards  the  Helles- 
pont. Afterwards  changing  his  purpose,  he  left  his  work  un- 
finished, and  went  to  Byzantium,  where  he  admired  the  situa- 
tion of  the  place,  and  therefore  resolved,  when  he  had  consider- 
ably enlarged  it,  to  make  it  a  residence  worthy  of  an  emperor. 
The  city  stands  on  a  rising  ground,  which  is  part  of  the  isth- 
mus inclosed  on  each  side  by  the  Ceras  and  Propontis,  two 
arms  of  the  sea.  It  had  formerly  a  gate,  at  the  end  of  the  por- 
ticos, which  the  emperor  Severus  built  after  he  was  reconciled 
to  the  Byzantines,  who  had  provoked  his  resentment  by  admit- 
ing  his  enemy  Niger  into  their  city.  At  that  time  the  wall 
reached  down  from  the  west  side  of  the  hill  at  the  temple  of 
Venus  to  the  sea  side,  opposite  to  Chrysopolis.  On  the  north 
side  of  the  hill  it  reached  to  the  dock,  and  beyond  that  to  the 
shore,  which  lies  opposite  the  passage  into  the  Euxine  sea.  This 
narrow  neck  of  land,  between  there  and  the  Pontus,  is  nearly  three 
hundred  stadia  in  length.  This  was  the  extent  of  the  old  city. 
Constantine  built  a  circular  market-place  where  the  old  gate 
had  stood,  and  surrounded  it  with  double  roofed  porticos,  erecting 
two  great  arches  of  Prasconnesian  marble  against  each  other, 
through  which  was  a  passage  into  the  porticos  of  Severus,  and 
out  of  the  old  city.  Intending  to  increase  the  magnitude  of  the 
city,  he  surrounded  it  with  a  wall  which  was  fifteen  stadia  be- 
yond the  former,  and  inclosed  all  the  isthmus  from  sea  to  sea. 
Having  thus  enlarged  the  city,  he  built  a  palace  little  inferior 
to  that  of  Rome,  and  very  much  embellished  the  hippodrome, 
or  horse-course,  taking  into  it  the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux, 
whose  statues  are  still  standing  in  the  porticos  of  the  hippo- 
drome. He  placed  on  one  side  of  it  the  tripod  that  belonged 
to  the  Delphian  Apollo,  on  which  stood  an  image  of  the  deity. 

*  It  is  almost  needless  to  say,  that  all  that  is  here  related  of  Constantine  is 
the  slander  of  Julian  the  Apostate,  and  is  totally  without  any  foundation  in 
truth.  Crispus  was  justly  executed  for  an  atrocious  crime,  and  Fausta  perishecl 
by  an  accidental  suffocation  by  the  fault  of  the  bath  keepers. 


BOOK  if.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  53 


As  there  was  at  Byzantium  a  very  large  market-place,  con- 
sisting  of  four  porticos,  at  the  end  of  one  of  them,  to  which  a 
numerous  flight  of  steps  ascends,  he  erected  two  temples ;  in 
one  of  which  was  placed  the  statue  of  Rhea,  the  mother  of  the 
gods,  which  Jason's  companions  had  formerly  fixed  on  Mount 
Dindymus,  which  is  near  the  city  of  Cyzicus.  It  is  said,  that 
through  his  contempt  of  religion  he  impaired  this  statue  by  taking 
away  the  lions  that  were  on  each  side,  and  changing  the  position 
of  thfc  hands.  For  it  formerly  rested  each  hand  on  a  lion,  but 
was  now  altered  into  a  supplicating  posture,  looking  towards  the 
city,  and  seeming  to  observe  what  the  people  were  doing.  In  the 
other  temple  he  placed  the  statue  of  the  Fortune  of  Rome.  He  af- 
terwards built  convenient  dwellings  for  the  senators  who  followed 
him  from  Rome.  He  engaged  in  no  more  wars  ;  and  even  when 
the  Thaifalians,  a  Scythian  tribe,  made  an  incursion  into  his  do- 
minions, he  not  only  neglected  to  lead  his  army  against  them,  but 
after  he  had  lost  most  of  his  troops,  and  saw  the  enemy  plunder- 
ing all  before  them,  even  to  his  very  intrenchments,  was  content- 
ed to  save  himself  by  flight.  , 

When  he  was  delivered  from  the  distractions  of  war,  he  yielded 
himself  to  voluptuousness,  and  distributed  to  the  people  of  Byzan- 
tium a  present  of  corn,  which  is  continued  to  this  day.  As  he 
expended  the  public  treasure  in  unnecessary  and  unprofitable 
buildings,  he  likewise  built  some  which  in  a  short  time  were 
taken  down  again,  because  being  erected  hastily  they  could  not 
stand  long.  He  likewise  made  a  great  change  in  the  ancient 
magistracy.  Till  that  time  there  had  been  only  two  prefects  of 
the  court,  whose  authority  was  equal ;  not  only  were  the  court 
soldiers  under  their  controul,  but  those  also  which  guarded  the 
city,  and  who  were  stationed  in  its  neighbourhood.  The  person 
who  had  tfre  office  of  prefect  of  the  court,  which  was  esteemed 
the  next  post  of  honour  to  that  of  emperor,  distributed  the  gifts  of 
corn,  and  punished  all  offences  against  military  discipline.,  as  he 
thought  convenient.  Constantine  altered  this  good  institution, 
and  of  one  office  or  magistracy  fonmed  four.  To  one  of  those 
prefects  he  committed  all  Egypt  and  Pentapolis  in  Libya,  and  all 
the  east  as  far  as  Mesopotamia,  with  Cilicia,  Cappadocia,  Armenia, 
and  all  the  coast  from  Pamphylia  to  Trapezus  and  the  castles 
near  Phasis;  to  the  same  person  was  given  all  Thrace  and  Moesia, 
as  far  as  the  mountains  Ha3mus  and  Rhodope,  and  the  town  of 
Doberus.  He  likewise  added  Cyprus  and  all  the  Cyclades,  ex- 
cept Lemnos,  Imbrus,  and  Samothracia.  To  another  he  assigned 
Macedon,  Thessaly,  Crete,  and  Greece,  with  the  adjacent  islands, 
I 


54  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  11. 


both  the  Epiruses,  the  Illyrians,  the  Dacians,  the  Triballi,  and  the 
Punnonians  as  far  as  Valeria,  besides  the  upper  Moesia.  To  the 
third  prefect  he  entrusted  Italy  and  Sicily,  with  the  neighbour- 
ing1 islands,  and  Sardinia  and  Corsica,  together  with  all  Africa 
westward  of  the  Syrtes.  To  the  fourth  he  committed  all  beyond 
the  Alps,  Gaul,  Spain,  and  Britain.  Having  thus  divided  the 
power  of  these  prefects,  he  invented  other  methods  likewise  of 
diminishing  their  influence.  For  as  there  used  to  be  in  all  peaces, 
centurions,  tribunes,  and  generals,  he  appointed  officers  called 
Magistri  militum,  some  over  the  horse  and  others  over  the  foot, 
to  whom  he  gave  authority  to  discipline  the  soldiers,  and  pu- 
nish those  that  had  offended,  by  which  the  power  of  the  pre- 
fects was  diminished.  That  this  innovation  was  productive  of 
great  injury  to  public  affairs  both  in  peace  and  war  I  will  imme- 
diately prove*.  The  prefects  had  hitherto  collected  the  tribute  in 
all  places  by  their  officers,and  disposed  of  it  in  war  expences,  the 
soldiers  at  the  same  time  being  subject  to  their  authority,  whose 
offences  they  punished  at  discretion.  Under  these  circumstances, 
the  soldiers,  considering  that  the  same  person  who  gave  them 
their  pay  hatt  the  infliction  of  punishments  whenever  they  of- 
fended, did  not  dare  to  act  contrary  to  their  duty,  for  fear  of  their 
stipend  being  withheld,  and  of  being  duly  punished.  But  now 
since  one  person  is  paymaster  and  another  inspector  of  discipline, 
they  act  according  to  their  own  inclination. 

Constantino  likewise  adopted  another  measure,  which  gave  the 
Barbarians  free  access  into  the  Roman  dominions.  For  the  Ro- 
man empire,  as  1  have  related,  was,  by  the  care  of  Dioclesian, 
protected  on  its  remote  frontiers  by  towns  and  fortresses,  in  which 
soldiers  were  placed;  it  was  consequently  impossible  for  the  Bar- 
barians to  pass  them,  there  being  always  a  sufficient  force  to  op- 
pose their  inroads.  But  Constantine  destroyed  that  security  by 
removing  the  greater  part  of  the  soldiers  from  those  barriers  of 

*  Zosimus  throws  the  odium  of  the  insensible  decay  by  which  the  Roman 
empire  fell  to  ruin  upon  Constantine  ;  but  he  ought  to  have  more  cautiously 
weighed  his  arguments,  and  have  reflected  how  ready  those  persons,  who  have 
gained  the  highest  office  under  their  sovereign,  are  to  use  all  their  endea- 
vours to  acquire  the  attachment  of  the  soldiers,  and  from  the  hope  of  becoming 
emperors  themselves,  to  throw  every  thing  into  confusion.  Indeed  when  both 
the  care  of  military  discipline,  and  the  distribution  of  the  public  money  are 
committed  to  the  same  individual,  it  is  probable  that  he  will  take  some  oppor- 
t  'nity  of  acquiring  the  empire  to  himself,  having  every  thing  in  his  power 
which  can  influence  the  soldiers  with  the  hope  of  reward  and  dread  of  punish- 
ment  Constantiue  therefore  wisely  adopted  that  political  maxim,  Divide 
and  Rule. 


BOOK  ii.  OF    ZOSIMUS.  65 

the  frontiers,  and  placing  them  in  towns  that  had  no  need  of  de- 
fenders; thus  depriving  those  who  were  exposed  to  the  Barba- 
rians of  all  defence,  and  oppressing  the  towns  that  were  quiet 
with  so  great  a  multitude  of  soldiers,  that  many  of  them  were 
totally  forsaken  by  the  inhabitants.  He  likewise  rendered  his 
soldiers  effeminate  by  accustoming  them  to  public  spectacles  and 
pleasures.  To  speak  in  plain  terms,  he  was  the  first  cause  of 
the  affairs  of  the  empire  declining  to  their  present  miserable  state. 

However,  I  must  not  omit  to  relate,  that  having  given  to  his 
three  sons,  Constantine,  Constantius,  and  Constans,  the  title  of 
Caesars,  he  so  greatly,  enlarged  the  city  of  Constantinople,  that 
ninny  of  the  succeeding  emperors,  who  made  it  their  residence, 
drew  to  it  too  great  a  number  of  inhabitants,  who  flocked  there 
from  all  parts,  as  soldiers,  merchants,  and  in  other  occupa- 
tions. On  this  account,  its  walls  were  rendered  more  capaci- 
ous than  those  which  Constantine  built,  and  the  buildings  were 
permitted  to  be  placed  so  near  to  each  other,  that  the  inhabitants 
are  exposed  to  much  inconvenience  and  danger  both  in  their 
houses  and  in  the  streets.  Besides  this  a  considerable  portion  of 
the  sea  was  added  to  the  land  by  driving  down  piles,  thus  form- 
ing dry  ground,  on  which  was  built  a  sufficient  number  of 
houses  to  form  of  themselves  a  considerable  city. 

I  have,  indeed,  often  wondered,  since  the  city  of  Byzantium 
is  become  so  great  that  no  other  is  equal  to  it  either  in  felicity 
or  magnitude,  that  our  ancestors  had  not  any  prophecy  concern- 
ing its  good  fortune.  Having  directed  my  thoughts  some  time  to 
this  enquiry,  I  consulted  many  historians  and  collections  of  ora- 
cles, and  at  length,  after  much  difficulty  and  taking  great  pains 
to  interpret  them,  discovered  an  oracle,  which  is  attributed  to 
Sibylla  Erythraea,  or  Phaello  of  Epirus.  Nicomedes  the  son  of 
Prusias  relying  upon  this,  and  interpreting  it  to  his  own  ad- 
vantage, by  the  counsel  of  Attalus  made  war  upon  his  father. 
The  oracle  I  speak  of  is  this  : 

Thou  among  sheep,  O  King  of  Thrace,  shalt  dwell, 

But  breed  a  savage  lion,  fierce  and  fell, 

Who  all  the  product  of  thy  land  shall  spoil, 

And  reap  thy  fruitful  harvest  without  toil. 

But  tliou  shalt  not  enjoy  thy  honour  long, 

Torn  by  wild  dogs,  which  shall  about  thee  throng. 

Then  a  fierce,  hungry,  sleeping  wolf  shalt  thou 

Awake,  to  whom  thy  conquer'd  neck  shall  bow.  .  ^  • 

Next  a  whole  herd  of  wolves  Bithynia's  land*,, 

By  Jove's  decree  shall  ravage,  and  the  hand 

To  which  obedience  the  Byzantines  yield 

S^iall  in  short  time  her  royal  sceptre  weild. 


THE  HISTORY 


Bless'd  Hellespont  !  whose  buildings  by  the  hand 

Of  heaven  were  rais'd,  and  by  its  order  stand. 

Yet  shall  that  cruel  wolf  my  forces  fearr 

For  all  shall  know  me,  who  inhabit  here. 

My  sire's  designs  no  longer  I'll  conceal 

But  heaven's  intent  in  oracles  reveal. 

Thrace  shall  e're  long  a  monstrous  birth  produce, 

Baneful  to  all  by  course  of  time  and  use  : 

A  swelling  ulcer  by  the  sea  shall  grow, 

Which  wheii  it  breaks,  with  putrid  gore  shall  flow. 

This  oracle,  in  an  obscure  manner,  points  out  all  the  particular 
evils  that  were  to  befal  Bythynia  through  the  heavy  impositions 
laid  upon  it;  and  that  the  government  was  to  devolve  on  those 
to  whom  the  Byzantines  were  then  subject,  in  this  distich  : 

.  -  and  the  hand 
To  which  obedience  the  Byzantines  yield 
Shall  in  short  time  her  royal  sceptre  wield. 

And  though  the  events  foretold  did  not  occur  until  many  ages 
afterwards,  no  one  can  suppose  that  the  prophecy  related  to  any 
other  place  ;  for  all  time  is  short  in  respect  of  the  deity,  who 
exists  through  all  ages.  This  conjecture  I  have  formed  both 
from  the  words  of  the  prophecy  and  from  the  event.  Should 
any  believe  that  this  prophecy  has  a  different  import,  they  have 
liberty  to  enjoy  their  own  opinion. 

Constantine,  having  done  this,  not  only  continued  to  waste  the 
revenue  of  the  empire  in  useless  expences,  and  in  presents  to 
mean  and  worthless  persons,  but  oppressed  those  who  paid  the 
tributes,  and  enriched  those  that  were  useless  to  the  state.  For 
he  mistook  prodigality  for  magnificence*.  He  also  laid  a  tax 
of  gold  and  silver  on  all  merchants  and  tradesmen,  even  to 
the  lowest  classes,  nor  did  he  even  spare  the  poorest  prosti- 
tutef.  Thus,  on  the  return  of  every  fourth  year,  when  the 
tax  was  to  be  paid,  nothing  could  be  heard^through  the  whole 
city  but  lamentations  and  complaints.  When  the  time  arrived 

*  We  must  admit  that  Constantine  was  extravagant  in  his  expences, 
whence  Julian  took  occasion  to  ridicule  him  in  his  book  called  Coesares, 
where  he  introduces  Mercury  asking  Constantine,  "  What  do  you  think  a  com- 
mendable action  ?"  Constantine  replies,  "  For  a  man  who  possesses  much  to 
give  much  away." 

t  See  Evagrius  Hist.  Eccl.  1.  iii.  c.  SQ.  where  he  commends  Anastasius, 
in  whose  vcign  this  tax  was  taken  off.  But  he  inveighs  against  Zosimus  for 
saving  that  Constantine  was  the  author  of  it  in  these  words,  "  Who  would 
wonder  that  this  should  be  done  in  the  very  infancy  of  Christianity,  since  his 
holiness  the  Pope  suffers  the  saipe  things  now  it  has  attained  riper  years." 


BOOK  IT.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  5? 

nothing  but  whips  and  tortures,  provided  for  those  who  on  ac- 
count of  their  extreme  poverty  could  not  pay  th^  money.  Mo- 
thers were  even  forced  to  part  with  their  children,  and  fathers  to 
prostitute  their  daughters,  for  money  to  satisfy  the  collectors  of 
this  exaction.  Wishing  likewise  to  invent  some  trouble  for  the 
rich,  he  summoned  them  all  and  made  them  praetors,  for  which 
dignity  he  demanded  a  sum  of  money.  Upon  this  account  when 
they  who  had  the  management  of  this  affair  arrived  in  any  city 
the  people  fled  into  other  countries,  in  the  fear  of  gaining  this 
honour  with  the  loss  of  all  they  possessed.  He  had  the  schedules 
of  all  the  best  estates,  and  imposed  a  tribute  on  each  of  them, 
which  he  called  a  purse.  With  these  exactions  he  exhausted  all 
the  towns  ;  for  they  continued  in  force  so  long  even  after  the  time 
of  Constantine,  that  the  cities  were  completely  drained  of  money, 
and  many  of  them  forsaken  by  their  inhabitants. 

After  Constantine  had  oppressed  and  tormented  the  people  in 
these  various  modes,  he  died  of  a  disease,  and  was  succeeded  by 
his  three  sons,  who  were  not  born  of  Fausta  the  daughter  of  Max- 
imianus  Herculius,  but  of  another  woman,  whom  he  had  put  to 
death  for  adultery.  They  devoted  themselves  more  to  the  plea- 
sures of  youth  than  to  the  service  of  the  state.  They  began  by 
dividing  the  nations  between  them.  Constantine  the  eldest,  and 
Constans  the  youngest,  having  for  their  share  all  beyond  the  Alps, 
together  with  Italy  and  Illyricum,  the  countries  bordering  on  the 
Euxine  sea  and  all  that  belonged  to  Carthage  in  Africa;  Constan- 
tius  obtained  all  Asia,  the  east,  and  Egypt.  There  were  likewise 
others  who  shared  in  the  government;  Dalmatius,  whom  Constan- 
tine made  Caesar,  Constantius  his  brother,  and  Anabllianus,  who 
had  all  worn  robes  of  purple  embroidered  with  gold,  and  were 
promoted  to  the  order  of  Nobilissimates  by  Constantine,  from 
respect  to  their  being  of  his  own  family. 

The  empire  being  thus  divided,  Constantius,  who  appeared  to 
take  pains  not  to  fall  short  of  his  father  in  impiety,  began  by  shed- 
ding the  blood  of  his  nearest  relations.  He  first  caused  Constan- 
tius, his  father's  brother,  to  be  murdered  by  the  soldiers ;  next  to 
whom  he  treated  Dalmatius  in  the  same  manner,  as  also  Optatus 
whom  Constantine  had  raised  to  the  rank  of  a  Nobilissimate. 
Constantine  indeed  first  introduced  that  order,  and  made  a  law, 
that  every  Nobilissimate  should  have  precedence  even  of  the  pre- 
fects of  the  court.  At  that  time  Ablabius  prefect  of  the  court 
was  also  put  to  death  ;  and  fate  was  just  in  his  punishment,  be- 
cause he  had  concerted  the  murder  of  Sopatrus  the  philosopher, 
from  envy  of  his  familiarity  with  Constantine.  Being  unnatural 

VOL.  1.  NO.  1.  n 


58 


THE  HISTORY  N       BOOK  n. 


towards  all  his  relations,  he  included  Anaballianus  with  the  rest, 
suborning  the  soldiers  to  cry  out,  that  they  would  have  no  gover- 
nors but  the  children  of  Constantine.  Such  were  the  exploits 
of  Constantius. 

fn  the  mean  time  Constantine  and  Constans  were  disputing  for 
that  part  of  Africa  which  belonged  to  Carthage,  and  for  Italy. 
Constans,  who  wished  to  surprise  his  brother,  concealed  his 
enmity  for  three  years.  He  took  occasion,  when  he  was  in  a 
province  that  was  attached  to  himself,  to  send  soldiers  to  him, 
on  pretence  of  assisting  him  in  the  war  against' the  Persians,  but 
in  reality  to  assassinate  him  by  surprise.  This  they  accordingly 
performed.  Such  was  the  end  of  Constantine. 

Constans,  having  tbus  removed  his  brother,  exercised  every 
species  of  cruelty  toward  his  subjects,  exceeding  the  most  intoler- 
able tyranny.  He  purchased  some  well  favoured  Barbarians, 
and  had  others  with  him  as  hostages,  to  whom  he  gave  liberty 
to  harrass  his  subjects  as  they  pleased,  in  order  to  gratify  his  vici- 
ous disposition.  In  this  manner  he  reduced  all  the  nations  that 
were  subject  to  him  to  extreme  misery.  This  gave  uneasiness  to 
the  court  guards,  who  perceiving  that  he  was  much  addicted  to 
hunting  placed  themselves  under  the  conduct  of  Marcellinus  pre- 
fect of  the  treasury,  and  Magnentius  who  commanded  the  Joviani 
and  Herculiani  (two  legions  so  termed),  and  formed  a  plot  against 
him  in  the  following  manner.  Marcellinus  reported  that  he  meant 
to  keep  the  birth-day  of  his  sons,  and  invited  many  of  the  supe- 
rior officers  to  a  feast.  Amongst  the  rest  Magnentius  rose  from 
table  and  left  the  room  ;  he  presently  returned,  and  as  it  were  in  a 
drama  stood  before  them  clothed  in  an  imperial  robe.  Upon  this 
all  the  guests  saluted  him  with  the  title  of  king,  and  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Augustodunum,  where  it  was  done,  concurred  in  the  same 
sentlrnenr.  This  transaction  being  rumoured  abroad,  the  country 
people  flocked  into  the  city  ;  while  at  the  same  time  a  party  of 
lllyrian  cavalry  who  came  to  supply  the  Celtic  legions,  joined 
themselves  with  those  that  were  concerned  in  the  enterprize. 
When  the  officers  of  the  army  were  met  together,  and  heard 
the  leaders  of  the  conspiracy  proclaim  their  new  emperor,  they 
scarcely  knew  the  meaning  of  it ;  they  all,  however,  joined  in  the 
acclamation,  and  saluted  Magnentius  with  the  appellation  of 
Augustus.  When  this  became  known  to  Constans,  he  endeavoured 
to  escape  to  a  small  town  called  Helena,  which  lies  near  the 
Pyrenean  mountains.  He  was  taken  by  Gaison,  who  was  sent 
with  some  other  select  persons  for  that  purpose,  and  being 
destitute  of  all  aid,  was  killed. 

Magnentius  thus  gained  the  empire,  and  possessed  himself  all 


HOOK  H.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  59 

the  nations  beyond  the  Alps,  and  the  whole  of  Italy.  Vetranio, 
general  of  the  Pannonian  army,  upon  hearing  of  the  good  fortune 
of  Magnentius,  was  himself  inflamed  with  the  same  desire,  and 
was  declared  emperor  by  the  legions  that  were  with  him,  at  Mursa, 
a  city  of  Pannonia.  While  affairs  were  thus  situated,  the  Persians 
plundered  the  eastern  countries,  particularly  Mesopotamia.  But 
Constantine,  though  he  was  defeated  by  the  Persians,  yet  re- 
solved to  subdue  the  factions  of  Magnentius  and  Vetranio. 
While  he  was  forming'  these  resolutions,  and  was  very  intent 
on  warlike  preparations,  Magnentius  still  remaining  in  Gallia  Cel- 
lica,  Nepotianus,  nephew  to  Constantius,  by  his  sister  Eutropia, 
collected  a  band  of  persons  addicted  to  robbery  and  all  kinds  of 
debauchery,  with  whom  he  came  to  Rome,  and  appeared  in  an 
imperial  dress.  Anicetius,  whom  Magnentius  had  made  prefect 
*of  the  court,  armed  some  of  the  common  people,  and  led  them 
out  of  the  city  to  engage  with  Nepotianus.  A  sharp  conflict  en- 
sued between  them. .  The  Romans  being  undisciplined,  and  ob- 
serving no  order,  were  easily  routed  ;  and  when  the  prefect  saw 
them  fly,  he  shut  the  gates,  for  fear  the  enemy  should  follow 
them  into  the  city.  The  troops  of  Nepotianus  pursued  them,  and 
as  they  had  no  way  of  escape,  killed  every  man.  In  a  few  days 
after,  Magnentius  sent  an  army  under  the  command  of  Marcel  li- 
nns, and  Nepotianus  was  put  to  death. 

Meantime  Constantius  advanced  from  the  east  against  Magnen- 
tius, but  deemed  it  best  first  to  win  over  Vetranio  to  his  interest, 
as  it  was  difficult  to  oppose  two  rebels  at  once.  On  the  other 
hand,  Magnentius  used  great  endeavours  to  make  Vetranio  his 
friend,  and  thus  to  put  an  end  to  the  war  against  Constantius. 
Both  therefore  sent  agents  to  Vetranio,  who  chose  to  adopt  the 
friendship  of  Constantius  rather  than  that  of  Magnentius.  The 
ambassadors  of  Magnentius  returned  without  effecting  their  pur- 
pose. Constantius  desired  that  both  armies  might  join,  to 
undertake  the  war  against  Magnentius.  To  which  proposal  Ve- 
tranio readily  assented;  and  they  seated  themselves  on  a  throne 
provided  for  the  occasion.  Constantius,  speaking  first  according 
to  his  dignity,  endeavoured  to  remind  the  soldiers  of  his  father's 
munificence,  and  of  the  oaths  they  had  taken  to  be  true  to  his 
children.  He  then  told  them,  that  they  ought  not  to  suffer  Mag- 
nentius to  go  unpunished,  who  had  murdered  the  son  of  Constan- 
tine, with  whom  they  had  fought  many  battles,  and  had  been 
generously  remunerated.  When  the  soldiers  heard  this,  having 
been  previously  corrupted  by  valuable  presents,  they  cried  out, 
that  they  would  have  no  mock  emperors,  and  immediately  began 
to  strip  the  purple  from  Vetranio,  and  pulled  him  from  the  throne. 


60    THE  HISTORY BOOK    n. 

with  the  determination  to  reduce  him  to  a  private  station.  Con- 
stantius  would  not  suffer  them  to  injure  him,  and  therefore 
sent  him  into  Bithynia,  where  he  allowed  him  a  competency 
for  life.  He  had  not  remained  there  long  without  employment 
before  he  died. 

Constantius,  having  so  well  succeeded  in  his  design  against 
Vetranio,  marched  against  Magnentius,  having  first  conferred  the 
title  of  Ccpsar  on  Gallus,  the  son  of  his  uncle,  and  brother  to  Ju- 
lian who  was  afterwards  emperor,  and  given  him  in  marriage  his 
sister  Constantia;  either  in  order  that  he  might  oppose  the  Per- 
sians, or  as  seems  more  probable*  that  he  might  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  taking  him  off.  He  and  his  brothers  were  the  only  re- 
maining persons  of  the  family  whom  Constantius  had  not  put  to 
death,  as  I  have  related.  When  he  had  clothed  Gallus  with  the 
Caesarean  robe,  and  appointed  Lucilianus  general  in  the  Persian 
war,  he  marched  towards  Magnentius  with  his  own  troops  and 
those  of  Vetranio  in  one  body.  Magnentius,  on  the  other  hand, 
resolved  to  meet  him  with  a  larger  force.  He  declared  his  kins- 
man Caesar,  and  appointed  him  to  govern  the  nations  beyond 
the  Alps.  The  armies  meeting  in  Pannonia,  and  coming  near  to 
each  other  at  a  town  called  Mursa,  Magnentius  placed  an  ambus- 
cade in  the  defiles  near  to  Adrana,  and  sent  a  messenger  to  the 
officers  of  the  army  of  Constantine  to  retard  their  march,  saying, 
that  they  might  proceed  to  Siscia,  where  he  intended  to  give 
them  battle,  the  fields  in  that  neighbourhood  being  spacious  and 
open.  When  Constantius  heard  this,  he  was  much  pleased  that 
he  was  to  fight  in  a  place  where  there  was  room  for  the  cavalry 
to  manoeuvre,  being  superior  to  the  enemy  in  that  kind  of  force. 
He  accordingly  led  his  army  to  Siscia.  As  they  were  marching 
unarmed  and  without  order,  not  suspecting  any  thing,  the  troops 
that  lay  in  ambush  attacked  them,  and  blocked  up  their  passage 
with  stones,  which  they  threw  upon  them  in  such  quantities  that 
great  part  of  them  were  killed. 

Magnentius,  perceiving  that  many  of  his  enemies  were  thus 
slain,  was  so  elated,  that  being  now  unwilling  to  defer  the  war, 
he  mustered  his  forces,  and  immediately  marched  towards,  Pan- 
nonia. Arriving  in  the  plain  before  Cius,  through  the  midst  of 
which  runs  the  river  Draus,  which,  passing  by  Noricum  and  Pan- 
nonia, discharges  itself  into  the  Ister,  he  led  his  troops  into  Pan- 
nonia, intending  to  engage  near  Sirmium.  His  mother  is  said  to 
have  enjoined  him  not  to  go  that  way,  or  over  into  Illyricum,  but 
he  disregarded  her  injunctions,  though  on  many  former  occasions 
he  had  found  her  a  true  prophetess.  Meantime  he  deliberated 
whether  to  construct  a  bridge  over  the  Sans,  or  to  pass  over  on 


BOOK    II. 


OF  ZOSIMUS.  6t 


boats  joined  together  for  that  purpose.  At  the  same  time,  Con- 
stantius  sent  one  of  the  principal  persons  in  his  service,  named 
Philip,  a  man  of  extraordinary  prudence,  under  pretence  of  treat- 
ing for  peace  and  an  alliance,  but  in  reality  to  observe  the  state 
and  disposition  of  the  army  of  Magnentius,  and  to  discover  their 
intended  movements.  Approaching  the  camp,  he  met  Marcelli- 
nus,  the  principal  confidant  of  Magnentius,  and  by  him  was  con- 
ducted to  Magnentius.  The  army  being  drawn  up,  Philip  was 
desired  to  explain  the  cause  of  his  coming.  Upon  which  he  di- 
rected himself  to  the  soldiers,  telling  them,  that  it  did  not  be- 
come them,  who  were  Roman  subjects,  to  make  war  on  R6mans, 
especially  as  the  emperor  was  the  son  of  Constantine,  with  whom 
they  had  erected  many  trophies  over  the  Barbarians.  That  Mag- 
nentius, moreover,  ought  to  remember  Constantine,  and  the  kind- 
ness he  had  shewn  to  him  and  to  his  parents.  That  it  was  Con- 
stantine who  had  protected  him  when  in  imminent  danger,  and 
exalted  him  to  the  highest  dignities.  Having  made  these  obser- 
vations, he  requested  Magnentius  to  depart  from  Italy,  and  to  be 
content  with  the  government  of  the  nations  beyond  the  Alps. 

This  speech  of  Philip  nearly  occasioned  a  mutiny  of  the  whole 
army.  Magnentius,  therefore,  being  alarmed,  with  much  diffi- 
culty prevailed  on  the  soldiers  to  attend  to  him.  He  said,  that 
he  likewise  was  desirous  of  concluding  a  peace,  but  would  then 
dismiss  the  assembly,  until  he  had  deliberated  how  to  act.  Upon 
which,  the  assembly  being  dissolved,  Marcellianus  entertained 
Philip  as  one  whom  he  was  desirous  of  obliging  by  the  laws  of 
hospitality.  Meanwhile,  Magnentius  debated  with  himself,  whe- 
ther to  dismiss  Philip  without  the  purpose  of  his  embassy  being 
effected,  or,  in  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,  detain  him.  He 
determined,  after  much  hesitation,  to  invite  all  the  officers  of  his 
army  to  sup  with  him,  and  at  table  inform  them  of  his  opinion.  The 
following  day  he  again  convened  the  army;  he  reminded  them 
of  the  injuries  they  received  from  Constans  when  furious  and  in- 
toxicated. That  the  soldiers  could  not  sustain  the  enormities 
with  which  he  oppressed  the  state  contrary  to  all  law  and  justice, 
but  had  inclined  to  what  was  most  for  the  public  advantage  ;  and 
that  after  they  had  freed  the  cities  from  so  savage  a  monster,  they 
had  compelled  him  to  become  their  emperor. 

He  had  scarcely  concluded  this  address,  when  they  all  rose, 
and  displayed  their  willingness  to  continue  the  war  by  arming 
themselves  immediately,  in  order  to  cross  the  Saus.  The  centi- 
nels  who  were  on  the  watch  in  Siscia,  a  town  that  lies  on  the 
Saus,  perceived  their  approach,  and  gave  notice  of  it  to  the  garri* 
•on,  who  shot  some  of  them  as  they  were  landing  on  the  bank  of 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  li. 


the  river,  and  stopped  others  who  were  coming  over  ;  so  that 
many  of  them  were  slain,  but  more  pushed  into  the  river,  either 
by  each  other  or  by  the  enemy.  By  which  means  a  great  slaugh- 
ter was  made  amongst  them,  and  while  one  party  fell  from  the 
bridge  in  their  haste  to  escape,  the  other  pursued  with  the  greatest 
speed  :  so  that  Magnentius,  who  was  reduced  to  his  last  device, 
had  only  one  method  of  avoiding  the  present  danger.  He  struck 
a  spear  into  the  ground,  and  beckoned  with  his  right  hand  to  the 
enemy  as  if  he  wished  to  treat  for  peace.  When  he  saw  that 
they  attended  to  this,  he  said  he  would  not  pass  the  Saus  without 
the  ei.'iperor's  permission.  As  soon  as  he  had  said  this,  Philip 
told  him,  that  if  he  would  treat  for  peace,  he  must  leave  Italy 
and  Noricum,and  go  into  lllyricum.  Constantius,  having  heard 
what  was  said,  commanded  his  soldiers  to  continue  their  pur- 
suit no  longer,  and  permitted  Magnentius  to  bring  his  troops 
into  the  plains  between  Noricum,  Pannonia,  Moesia,  and  Dacia; 
having  a  wish  to  leave  those  rugged  places,  and  to  contend  where 
his  horse  would  have  room  to  manoeuvre,  for  in  that  species  of 
force  he  had  the  advantage  of  the  enemy.  His  design  succeeded; 
and  lie  appointed  Cibalis  which  he  thought  a  convenient  place 
for  his  purpose  ;  it  being  the  place  where  Constantine  conquered 
Licinius.  In  that  town,  which  is  situated  as  I  have  described  in  my 
narrative  of  those  times,  he  kept  part  of  his  army.  And  having 
erected  a  bulwark  between  the  hill  on  which  the  town  stands, 
and  the  plain  through  which  the  river  Saus  flows,  he  inclosed  all 
that  part  of  it  which  is  not  encompassed  by  the  river,  with  a 
deep  ditch  and  a  strong  rampart.  He  then  made  a  bridge  of  boats 
over  that  part  of  the  river  which  surrounds  the  place,  which 
bridge  he  could  disjoin  when  he  pleased,  and  put  together  again 
with  the  same  eas^.  Here  he  placed  tents  for  his  army,  and  in 
the  midst  of  them  a  royal  tent  of  exceeding  magnificence.  The 
emperor  then  invited  his  officers  to  a  banquet,  at  which  all  except 
Latinus  and  Thalassius  were  present.  These  were  absent,  though 
they  were  the  greatest  favourites  of  the  emperor,  because  they 
were  officiating  for  Philip,  who  was  detained  by  Magnentius,  not- 
withstanding his  being  an  ambassador. 

While  they  were  consulting  about  this  affair,  Titianus,  a  man 
of  the  senatorian  order  at  Rome,  came  with  an  insolent  mes- 
sage from  Magnentius.  He  employed  many  absurd  expres- 
sions against  Constantine  and  his  children,  charging  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  cities  on  the  emperor's  negligence,  and  commanded 
Constantius  to  make  way  for  Magnentius  by  abdicating  the  em- 
pire, and  to  be  contented  with  his  life  being  granted  him.  But 


HOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMTJS. 


the  emperor  only  desired  the  gods  and  fate  to  be  the  avengers  of 
Oonstans,  saying  that  he  would  fight  with  their  assistance.  He 
suffered  Titianus  to  return  to  Magnentius,  though  Philip  still  re- 
mained in  his  custody.  Magnentius  now  drew  out  his  army,  and 
taking  Siscia  on  the  first  assault,  razed  it  to  the  ground.  Having 
overrun  all  the  country  near  theSaus,  and  acquirer1,  great  plunder, 
be  marched  towards  Sirmium,  which  he  hoped  likewise  to  take 
without  bloodshed.  But  failing  in  his  attempt,  being  repulsed 
by  the  inhabitants  and  the  troops  that  defended  the  town,  he 
inarched  with  his  whole  army  to  Mursa.  Finding  that  those  in 
the  town  bad  shut  the  gates  against  him  and  mounted  the -walls, 
he  was  at  a  loss  how  to  act.  on  the  occasion,  having  no  engines 
nor  any  other  method  of  getting  near  the  wall.  He  was  as- 
sailed with  stones  and  darts  by  those  that  stood  on  the  battlements. 
When  Constantius  heard  that  the  place  was  besieged,  he  marched 
with  all  his  forces  to  its  relief,  having  passed  by  Cibalis  and  all 
the  country  through  which  the  river  Draus  passes. 

Meanwhile  Magnentius  approached  nearer  to  Mursa,  and  set 
fire  to  the  gates,  thinking  if  he  could  destroy  the  iron  that  covered 
the  wood,  which  would  soon  yield  to  the  flames,  he  might  make 
a  passage  wide  enough  for  the  entrance  of  his  army  into  the  city. 
But  this  did  not  succeed  to  his  wishes,  the  people  on  the  wail 
extinguishing  the  Barnes  with  water  \vhich  they  poured  down  in 
large  quantities.  When  he  therefore  heard  that  Constantius  was 
near  Mursa,  he  invented  another  stratagem  to  this  effect.  There 
was  before  the  city  a  stadium  or  place  of  exercise,  formerly 
used  by  those  that  fought  for  prizes,  which  was  covered  over 
with  wood.  In  this  he  concealed  four  companies  of  Celtie,  with 
orders  when  Constantius  should  come  up,  and  they  were  ready 
to  engage  before  the  city,  to  attack  the  enemy  by  surprise,  and  to 
surround  them  and  kill  every  man.  This  being  discovered  by  those 
that  were  on  the  walls,  Constantius  immediately  sent  thither  Sco- 
lidoas  and  Manadus,  two  of  his  officers.  They  first  selected  the 
choicest  of  their  men,  both  heavy  armed  and  archers,  and  taking 
them  along  with  themselves,  fastened  up  all  the  doors  of  the  sta* 
dium.  Having  then  possessed  themselves  of  the  upper  steps 
leading  into  the  Stadium,  and  inclosed  the  soldiers  that  were 
within  on  all  sides,  they  threw  darts  at  them.  And  observing 
some  of  them  with  their  shields  placed  over  their  heads  attempting 
to  force  open  the  doors,  they  fell  upon  them  and  did  not  cease 
throwing  darts  or  cutting  at  them  with  their  swords  until  they 
had  killed  them  all.  This  project  of  Magnentius  being  thus  frus- 
trated, the  armies  met  and  engaged  in  the  plain  before  Mursa; 


64  'THE  HISTORY  BOOK  n. 

where  such  a  battle  was  fought  as  had  not  occurred  before  in  the 
course  of  this  war,  and  great  numbers  fell  on  both  sides. 

Coustantius,  considering  that  as  this  was  a  civil  war  victory  it- 
self would  be  scarcely  •  an  advantage  to  him,  now  the  Romans 
being  so  much  weakened,  as  to  be  totally  unable   to  resist  the 
Barbarians  who  attacked  them  on  every  side,  began  to  think  that 
it  would  be  better  to  end  the  war  by  offering  proposals  for  peace. 
While  he  was  thus  deliberating,  the  armies  were  still  engaged ; 
and  that  of  Maguentius  became  more  furious,  nor  would  they  cease 
lighting  though  night  came  on,  but  even  their  officers  continued 
performing  what  belonged  to  common  soldiers,  and  encouraging 
tlieir  men  to  oppose  the  enemy  with  vigour.     On  the  other  side 
likewise,  the  oificers  of  Constantius  called  to  mind  the  ancient 
bravery  and  renown  of  the  Romans.     Thus  the  battle   continued 
until  it  was  completely  dark";  nor  did  even  darkness  cause  them 
to  relax  ;  but  they  wounded  each  other  with  spears,  swords  or 
whatever  was  in  their  reach  ;  so  that  neither  night  nor  any  other 
obstacle  which  usually  causes  some  respite  in  war,  could  put  an 
end  to  the  slaughter,  as  if  they  thought  it  the  greatest  felicity  that 
could  happen  to  them  to  perish  beside  each  other.     Amongst  the 
officers  that  shewed  great  bravery  in  this  battle  and  fell  in  it  were 
A  read  i  us,  commander  of  the  legion  called  Abulci,  and  Menelaus, 
who  commanded  the  Armenian   horse  archers.     What  is  said  of 
Menelaus  is  worthy  of  being  related.     He  could  take  three  darts 
at  once,  and  with  one  shot  hit  three  men,  by  which  manner  of 
shooting  he  killed  a  great  number  of 'the  enemy,  and  was  him- 
self almost  the  cause  of  their  flight.     He  was  killed  by  Romulus, 
who  was  the  first  in  command  in  the  army  of  Magnentius,  and 
ftomulus  himself  fell  at  the  same  time.      He  was  wounded  by  a 
dart  which  Menelaus  had  thrown  at  him,  yet  continued  fighting 
after  he  had  received  the  wound,  until  he  had  killed  the   person 
who  had  given  it  to  him. 

Constantius  now  gaining  the  victory,  by  the  army  of  Magnen- 
tius taking  to  flight,  a  terrible  slaughter  ensued.  Magnentius,  there- 
fore being  deprived  of  all  hope,  and  apprehensive  lest  the  remnant 
of  his  army  should  deliver  him  to  Constantius,  deemed  it  best  to 
retire  from  Pannonia,  and  to  enter  Italy,  in  order  to  raise  an  army 
there  for  another  attempt.  But  when  he  heard  that  the  people  of 
Rome  were  in  favour  of  Constantius,  either  from  hatred  to  him- 
self, or  because  they  had  heard  of  the  event  of  the  battle,  he  re- 
solved to  cross  the  Alps,  and  seek  for  himself  a  refuge  among  the 
nations  on  that  side.  Hearing  however  that  Constantius  had  like- 
wise engaged  the  Barbarians  near  the  Rhine  against  him,  and  that 


BOOK  ii.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  65 

he  could  not  enter  Gaul,  as  some  officers  had  obstructed  his  pas- 
sage thither  in  order  to  make  their  court  to  Constantius,  nor 
through  Spain  into  Mauritania,  on  account  of  the  Roman  allies 
there  who  studied  to  please  Constantius.  In  these  circumstances 
he  preferred  a  voluntary  death  to  a  dishonourable  life,  and  chose 
rather  to  die  by  his  own  hand  than  by  that  of  his  enemy. 

Thus  died  Magnentius,  having  been  emperor  three  years  and 
six  months.  He  was  of  Barbarian  extraction,  but  lived  among 
the  Leti,  a  people  of  Gaul.  He  understood  Latin,  was  bold  when 
favoured  by  fortune,  but  cowardly  in  adversity,  ingenious  in  con- 
cealing his  natural  evil  disposition,  and  deemed  by  those  who  did 
not  know  him  to  be  a  man  of  candour  and  goodness.  I  have 
thought  it  just  to  make  these  observations  concerning  Magnentius, 
that  the  world  may  be  acquainted  with  his  true  character,  since 
it  has  been  the  opinion  of  some  that  he  performed  much  good, 
who  never  in  his  life  did  any  thing  with  a  good  intention. 

Decentius,  whom  Magnentius  had  called  to  his  assistance,  be- 
ing now  on  the  road  to  Italy,  soon  heard  of  the  misfortune  of 
Magnentius ;  meeting  with  some  legions  and  troops  from  which 
he  saw  no  hope  of  escaping,  slew  himself.  After  these  occur- 
rences, the  whole  empire  being  now  in  the  hands  of  Constan- 
tius, he  began  to  be  more  arrogant  than  before,  and  could  not 
conduct  himself  with  any  moderation  in  his  prosperity.  The 
state-informers,  with  which  such  men  are  usually  surrounded, 
and  which  are  designed  for  the  ruin  of  those  that  are  in  prospe- 
rity, were  augmented.  These  sycophants,  when  they  attempted 
to  effect  the  downfal  of  a  noble  in  hopes  of  sharing  his  wealth  or 
honours,  contrived  some  false  accusation  against  him.  This  was 
the  practice  in  the  time  of  Constantius.  Spies  pf  this  description, 
who  made  the  eunuchs  of  the  court  their  accomplices,  flocked 
about  Constantius,  and  persuaded  him  that  his  cousin  german  Gal- 
lus,  who  was  a  Caesar,  was  not  satisfied  with  that  honour,  but 
wished  to  be  emperor.  They  so  far  convinced  him  of  the  truth 
of  this  charge,  that  they  made  him  resolve  upon  the  destruction  of 
Gallus.  The  contrivers  of  this  design  were  Dynamius  and  Picen- 
tius,  men  of  obscure  condition,  who  endeavoured  to  raise  them- 
selves by  such  evil  practises.  Lampadius  also,  the  Prefect  of  the 
court,  was  in  the  conspiracy,  being  a  person  who  wished  to  engross 
more  of  the  emperor's  favour  than  any  other.  Constantius  listened 
to  those  false  insinuations,  and  Gallus  was  sentfor,  knowingnothing 
of  what  was  intended  against  him.  As  soon  as  he  arrived,  Constan- 
tius first  degraded  him  from  the  dignity  of  Caesar,  and  having  re- 
duced him  to  private  station,  delivered  him  to  the  public  execu- 

VOL.  1.  NO.  1,  i 


66  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  HI. 

tioners  to  be  put  to  death.  This  was  not  the  first  time  that  Con- 
stantius  imbrued  his  hands  in  the  blood  of  his  relations,  but  only 
one  other  in  addition  to  many  former. 

THIRD  BOOK. 


CONSTANTIUS,  after  having  acted  towards  Gall  us  Caesar  in 
the  manner  I  have  related,  left  Pannonia  to  proceed  into  Italy. 
But  perceiving  all  the  Roman  territories  to  be  infested  by  the  incur- 
sions of  the  Barbarians,  and  that  the  Franks,  the  Alemanni,  and  the 
Saxons  had  not  only  possessed  themselves  of  forty  cities  near  the 
Rhine,  but  had  likewise  ruined  and  destroyed  them,  by  carrying 
off  an  immense  number  of  the  inhabitants,  and  a  proportionate 
quantity  of  spoils;  and  that  the  Sarmatians  and  theQuadi  ravaged 
without  opposition  Pannonia  and  the  upper  Mcesia  ;  besides  which 
that  the  Persians  were  perpetually  harassing  the  eastern  provinces, 
though  they  had  previously  been  tranquil  in  the  fear  of  an  attack 
from  Gallus  Caesar;  considering  these  circumstances,  and  being  in 
doubt  what  to  attempt,  he  scarcely  thought  himself  capable  of 
managing  affairs  at  this  critical  period.  He  was  unwilling,  how- 
ever, to  associate  any  one  with  himself  in  the  government,  be- 
cause he  so  much  desired  to  rule  alone,  and  could  esteem  no  man 
his  friend.  Under  these  circumstances  he  was  at  a  loss  how  to 
act.  It  happened,  however,  that  when  the  empire  was  in  the 
greatest  danger,  Eusebia,  the  wife  of  Constantius,  who  was  a 
woman  of  extraordinary  learning,  and  of  greater  wisdom  than  her 
sex  is.  usually  endowed  with,  advised  him  to  confer  the  govern- 
ment of  the  nations  beyond  the  Alps  on  Julianus  Caesar,  who  was 
brother  to  Callus,  and  'grandson  to  Constantius.  As  she  knew 
that  the  emperor  was  suspicious  of  all  his  kindred,  she  thus  cir- 
cumvented him.  She  observed  to  him,  that  Julian  was  a  young 
man  unacquainted  with  the  intrigues  of  state,  having  devoted 
himself  totally  to  his  studies;  and  that  he  was  wholly  inexperi- 
enced in  worldly  business.  That  on  this  account  he  would  be 
more  fit  for  his  purpose  than  any  other  person.  That  either  he 
would  be  fortunate,  and  his  success  would  be  attributed  to  the 
emperor's  conduct,  or  that  he  would  fail  and  perish ;  and  that 
thus  Constantius  would  have  none  of  the  imperial  family  to  suc- 
ceed to  him. 

Constantius,  having  approved  her  advice,  sent  for  Julian  from 
Athens,  where  he  lived  among^ the  philosophers,  and  excelled  all 
his  masters  in  every  kind  of  learning.  Accordingly,  Julian  return- 


BOOK  in.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  6? 

ing  from  Greece  into  Italy,  Qonstantius  declared  him  Caesar,  gave 
him  in  marriage  his  sister  Helepa,  and  sent  him  beyond  the  Alps. 
But  being  naturally  distrustful,  he  could  not  believe  that  Julian, 
would  be  faithful  to  turn,  and  therefore  sent  along  with  him  Mar- 
cellus  and  Sallustius,  to  whom,  and  not  to  Caesar,  he  committed 
the  entire  administration  of  that  government. 

Constantius,  having  thus  disposed  of  Julian,  marched  himself 
into  Pannonia  and  Mossia,  and  having  there  suppressed  the  Quadi 
and  the  Sarmatians,  proceeded  to  the  east,  and  was  provoked  to 
war  by  the  inroads  of  the  Persians.  Julian  by  this  time  had  arrived 
beyond  the  Alps  into  the  Gallic  nations  which  he  was  to  rule. 
Perceiving  that  the  Barbarians  continued  committing  the  same 
violence,  Eusebia,  for  the  same  reasons  as  before,  persuaded  Con- 
stantius to  place  the  entire  management  of  those  countries  into 
the  hands  of  Julian.     Of  Julian's  actions  from  that  period  through 
the  short  course  of  his  futurelife,  may  be  read  at  large  in  the  histo- 
rians and  poets;  though  none  that  have  ever  written  of  him  have 
fully  reached  to  the  justice  of  his  character.     Whoever  desires 
it  may  see  his  own  orations  and  epistles,  and  in  them  survey  what 
he  performed  for  the  public  service.    Indeed  I  would  give  a  fuller 
account|of  him,  but  that  I  ought  not  to  interrupt  the  order  of  my 
history.     However  I  shall  notice  his  most  signal  actions  in  their 
proper  place ;  and  particularly  such  circumstances  as  others  have 
omitted.     Constantius  having  therefore  given  toCaesarfull  autho- 
rity over  the  nations  under  his  government,  marched  into  the  east, 
to  make  war  on  the  Persians.     Julian  finding  the  military  affairs 
of  Gallia  Celtica  in  a  very  ruinous  state,  and  that  the  Barbarians, 
pased  the  Rhine  without  any  resistance,  even  almost  as  far  as  the 
sea-port  towns,  he  took  a  survey  of  the  remaining  parts  of  the 
enemy.     And  understanding  that  the  people  of  those  parts  were 
terrified  at  the  very  name  of  the  Barbarians,  while  those  whom 
Constantius  had  sent  along  with  him,  who  were  not  more  than 
three  hundred  and  sixty,  knew  nothing' more,  as  he  used  to  say, 
than  how  to  say  their  prayers,  he  enlisted  as  many  more  as  he 
could  and  took  in  a  great  number  of  volunteers.    He  also  provided 
arms,  and  finding  a  quantity  of  old  weapons  in  some  town  befitted 
them  up,  and  distributed  them  among  the  soldiers.     The  scouts 
bringing  him  intelligence,  that  an  immense  number  of  Barbarians 
had  crossed  the  river  near  the  city  of  Argentoratum  (Strasburgh) 
which  stands  on  the  Rhine,  he  no  sooner  heard  of  it,  than  he  led 
forth  his  army  with  the  greatest  speed,  and  engaging  with  the  ene- 
ihy  gained  such  a  victory  as  exceeds  all  description.     It  is  said 
that  sixty  thousand  men  were  killed  on  the  spot,  besides  as  many 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  HI. 


more  thai  were  driven  into  the  river  and  drowned.  In  a  word,  if 
this  victory  be  comparer}  to  that  of  Alexander  over  Darius,  it 
will  be  found  in  no  respects  inferior  to  it. 

We  ought  not  however  to  pass  over  in  silence  an  action  of  Cae- 
sar after  the  victory.  He  possessed  a  regiment  of  six  hundred  horse, 
which  were  well  disciplined,  and  in  whose  valour  and  experience 
he  so  confided,  that  he  ventured  great  part  of  his  hopes  upon  their 
performances.  Indeed  when  the  battle  commenced,  the  whole 
army  attacked  the  enemy  with  all  the  resolution  they  could  show  ; 
but  some  time  afterwards,  though  the  Roman  army  had  consider- 
ably the  advantage,,  these  were  the  only  troops  that  fled,  and  left 
their  station  so  dishonourably,  that  when  Caesar  rode  up  to  them 
with  a  small  party,  and  called  them  back  to  a  share  of  the  victory, 
he  could  not  by  any  means  prevail  on  them  to  turn.  On  which  ac- 
count he  was  justly  indignant  with  them,  for  having  as  much  as 
related  to  them  betrayed  their  countrymen  to  the  Barbarians.  Yet 
he  did  not  inflict  on  them  the  usual  and  legal  punishment.  But 
he  dressed  them  in  women's  clothes,  and  led  them  through  the 
camp  towards  another  province,  thinking  that  such  a  punishment 
would  be  worse  than  death  to  soldiers  that  were  men.  Indeed 
this  happened  very  fortunately  both  for  him  and  them;  for  in  the 
second  war  against  the  Germans  they  recollected  the  ignominy 
which  had  previously  been  imposed  upon  them,  and  were  almost  the 
only  troops  who  conducted  themselves  bravely  in  that  engagement. 

After  these  events  he  raised  a  great  army  to  make  war  on  the 
whole  German  nation;  He  was  opposed  however  by  the  Barbarians 
in  vast  numbers.  Caesar  therefore  would  not  wait  while  they 
came  up  to  him,  but  crossed  the  Rhine;  preferring  that  their 
country  should  be  the  seat  of  war,  and  not  that  of  the  Romans  : 
as  by  that  means  the  cities  would  escape  being  again  pillaged  by 
the  Barbarians.  A  most  furious  battle  therefore  took  pkce  ;  a 
great  number  of  the  Barbarians  being  slain  on  the  field  of  battle, 
while  the  rest  fled,  and  were  pursued  by  Caesar  into  the  Hercy- 
nian  forest,  and  many  of  them  killed.  Vadomarius  the  son  of 
their  general  was  made  prisoner.  The  army  returned  home,  sing- 
ing songs  of  triumph,  and  praises  to  Caesar  for  the  exploits  he 
had  performed.  Julian  sent  Vadomarius  to  Constantius,  ascribing 
the  victories  he  had  gained  to  the  good  fortune  of  the  emperor. 

Meantime  the  Barbarians,  who  were  in  a  very  dangerous  situa- 
tion, fearing  for  their  wives  and  children,  lest  Caesar  should  ad- 
vance to  places  where  they  resided,  and  totally  destroy  their  whole 
race,  sent  ambassadors  to  sue  for  an  accomodation,  by  which  they 
would  bind  themselves  never  to  make  war  on  the  Romans  again. 


BOOK  HI.  OF  ZOSIMUS.    ,  69 

Caesar  told  them,  that  he  would  listen  to  no  proposals  for  peace, 
until  they  restored  the  captives  whom  they  had  formerly  taken  in 
the  various  towns  they  had  conquered.  As  they  consented  to 
this,  and  promised  to  deliver  all  that  remained  alive ;  Caesar  used 
the  following  method  of  ascertaining  that  no  single  captive  was 
detained  by  the  Barbarians.  He  sent  for  all  that  had  fled  out  of 
each  city  and  village,  and  required  them  to  give  him  the  names 
of  the  persons  who  had  been  carried  off  by  the  enemy  from 
each  of  such  city  or  village.  Each  of  them  having  named  the 
persons  whom  they  knew,  either  from  relationship,  friendship, 
neighbourhood,  or  some  other  ground,  he  ordered  the  imperial 
notaries  to  take  a  list  of  them ;  which  they  did  so  privately,  that 
the  ambassadors  knew  nothing  of  it.  Upon  this,  he  crossed  the 
Rhine,  and  commanded  them  to  bring  back  the  captives,  which  they 
in' a  short  time  obeyed.  As  they  declared  that  those  were  all  they 
had  taken,  Caesar,  who  was  seated  upon  a  high  throne,  behind 
which  the  notaries  were  placed,  ordered  the  Barbarians  to  produce 
their  captives,  according  to  their  agreement.  When  the  captives 
came  singly  before  him  and  told  their  names,  the  notaries,  who 
stood  close  behind  Caesar,  examined  their  papers  to  find  if  they 
were  all  correct.  Afterwards  comparing  those  which  they  had 
taken  down  with  what  had  appeared  before  Caesar,  and  perceiv- 
ing that  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  places  had  named  many 
more  than  were  present,  they  communicated  it  to  Caesar.  On 
which  he  threatened  the  ambassadors  with  a  war  against  their 
countrymen,  for  not  delivering  all  the  captives,  and  by  the  infor- 
mation of  the  notaries  named  some  individuals  of  particular  places 
that  were  yet  missing.  The  Barbarians,  on  hearing  this,  presently 
imagined  that  Caesar  had  the  most  abstruse  secrets  of  nature  re- 
vealed to  him  by  some  divine  intelligence,  and  therefore  promised 
to  give  up  all  that  they  found  alive,  and  bound  their  promise  with 
the  customary  oath  of  their  country. 

Having  done  this,  and  restored  as  many  captives  as  it  was  pro- 
bable had  been  taken  out  of  the  forty  cities  which  they  had  sacked, 
Caesar  was  at  a  loss  what  course  to  adopt,  perceiving  the  cities  to  be 
completely  ruined,  and  that  the  land  had  remained  long  without 
cultivation,  which  occasioned  great  scarcity  of  provisions  among 
those  who  were  delivered  up  by  the  Barbarians.  For  the  neigh- 
bouring cities  could  not  supply  them,  having  themselves  felt  the 
violence  of  the  Barbarians,  and  consequently  having  no  great  abun- 
dance for  their  own  use.  Having  therefore  deliberated  on  what 
course  to  pursue  he  formed  this  plan.  As  the  Rhine  discharges 
itself  at  the  extremityol  Germany  into  the  Atlantic  ocean,  and  the 


70  THE  HISTORY IIOOK  nr. 

island  of  Britain  is  about  nine  hundred  stadia  from  its  mouths, 
he  cut  timber  from  the  woods  on  the  banks  of  the  river,  and  built 
eight  hundred  small  vessels,  which  he  sent  into  Britain  for  a  sup- 
ply of  corn,  and  brought  it  up  the  Rhine.  This  was  so  often  re- 
peated, the  voyage  being  short,  that  he  abundantly  supplied  those 
who  were  restored  to  their  cities  with  sufficiency  for  their  sus- 
tenance, so  likewise  for  the  sowing  season,  and  what  they  needed 
until  harvest.'  These  actions  he  performed  when  he  had  scarcely 
attained  tlfe  twenty-fifth  year  of  his  age. 

Constantius,  perceiving  that  Julian  was  beloved  by  the  army 
for  his  frugality  in  peace  and  courage  in  war,  and  for  the  self- 
command  he  possessed  in  regard  to  riches,  and  the  other  virtues 
in  which  he  excelled  all  persons  of  the  age  in  which  he  lived, 
became  envious  of  his  great  merit,  and  concluded  that  Sallustius, 
one  of  the  counsellors  that  had  been  allotted  to  him,  was  the  au- 
thor of  the  policy  that  had  acquired  Julian  so  much  honour  both 
in  military  and  in  civil  affairs.  He,  therefore,  sent  for  Sallustius, 
as  if  he  intended  to  confer  the  governmentof  the  eastern  provinces 
upon  him.  Julian  readily  dismissed  him,  resolving  to  obey  the 
emperor  in  all  respects.  Though  Sallustius  was  removed,  Julian 
still  advanced  in  whatever  was  committed  to  his  care  ;  the  sol- 
diers improved  in  discipline  as  well  as  augmented  in  number, 
and  the  towns  enjoyed  the  blessings  of  peace. 

The  Barbarians  in  that  quarter  now  began  almost  all  to  de- 
spair, and  expected  little  short  of  the  complete  destruction  of  all 
that  remained  alive.  The  Saxons,  who  exceed  all  the  barbarians 
in  those  regions,  in  courage,  strength  and  hardiness,  sent  out  the 
Quadi,  a  part  of  their  own  body,  against  the  Roman  dominions. 
Being  obstructed  by  the  Franks  who  resided  near  them,  and  who 
•were  afraid  of  giving  Ceesar  a  just  occasion  of  making  another 
attack  on  them,  they  shortly  built  themselvesa  number  of  boats, 
in  which  they  sailed  along  the  Rhine  beyond  the  territory  of  the 
Franks,  and  entered  the  Roman  empire.  On  their  arrival  at  Ba- 
tavia,  which  is  an  island,  so  formed  by  the  branches  of  the  Rhine, 
much  larger  than  any  other  river  island,  they  drove  out  the  Salii, 
a  people  descended  from  the  Franks,  who  had  been  expelled  from 
their  own  country  by  the  Saxons.  This  island,  though  for 
merly  subject  to  the  Romans  alone,  was  now  in  the  possession  of 
the  Salii.  Caesar,  upon  learning  this, endeavoured  to  counteract  the 
designs  of  the  Quadi  ;  and  first  commanded  his  army  to  attack 
them  briskly  ;  but  not  to  kill  any  of  the  Salii,  or  prevent  them 
from  entering  the  Roman  territories,  because  they  came  not  as 
enemies,  but  .were  forced  there  by  the  Quadi. 


UOOK  HI.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  71 

As  soon  as  the  Salii  heard  of  the  kindness  of  Caesar,  some  of 
them  went  with  their  king  into  the  Roman  territory,  and  others 
fled  to  the  extremity  of  their  country,  but  all  humbly  committed 
their  lives  and  fortunes  to  Caesar's  gracious  protection.  Caesar  by 
this  time  perceiving  that  the  Barbarians  dared  not  again  engage 
him,  but  were  intent  on  secret  excursions,  and  rapine,  by  which 
they  did  great  damage  to  the  country,  scarcely  knew  how  to  act, 
until  at  length  he  invented  a  stratagem  to  confound  the  Barba- 
rians. There  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  stature,  and  of  courage 
proportioned  to  his  size.  Being  by  nation  a  Barbarian,  and  accus- 
tomed to  plunder  with  the  others,  he  had  thought  proper  to  leave 
his  own  country  and  go  into  Gallia  Celtica,  which  was  subject 
to  the  Romans,  While  he  was  residing  at  Treves,  which  is  the 
largest  city  in  all  the  nations  beyond  the  Alps,  and  saw  the  bar- 
harians  from  beyond  the  Rhine  ravaging  the  cities  on  this  side  of 
the  river,  and  committing  depredations  every  where  without  op- 
position, (which  was  before  Julian  was  made  Caesar),  he  resolved 
in  himself  to  defend  those  towns.  As  he  dared  not  attempt  this 
without  being  supported  by  the  law,  he  at  first  went  alone  into 
the  thickest  part  of  the  woods,  and  waited  there  till  the  Barbarians 
made  their  incursions.  In  the  night,  when  they  lay  intoxicated 
and  asleep,  he  fell  on  them  and  slew  them  in  great  numbers, 
bringing  their  heads  and  shewing  them  to  the  people  of  the 
town.  This  he  practised  continually  to  such  an  extent,  that  he 
abated  the  keenness  of  the  Barbarians,  who  though  unable  to  guess 
at  the  cause,  yet  were  sensible  of  the  losses  they  sustained,  the 
army  diminishing  daily.  Some  other  robbers  having  joined  this 
ma«,  and  their  number  having  increased  to  a  considerable  body, 
Charietto,  (which  was  the  name  of  the  man  who  first  used  this 
kind  of  ambuscade  against  the  Barbarians)  came  to  Caesar,  and 
told  him  the  whole  circumstances,  which  few  persons  knew  be- 
fore that  time.  Caesar,  was  at  this  time  unable  to  restrain  their  noc- 
turnal and  clandestine  incursions  of  the  Barbarians,  as  they  robbed 
in  small  parties,  straggling  from  each  other,  and  when  day  ap- 
peared, not  one  of  them  was  visible,  all  hiding  themselves  m  the. 
woods,  and  subsisting  on  what  they  gained  by  robbery.  /Consi- 
dering therefore  the  difficulty  of  subduing  such  an  enemy,  he  de- 
termined to  oppose  these  robbers,  not  with  an  army  of  soldiers, 
but  with  men  of  similar  description.  • 

For  this  reason,  he  sent  Charietto  and  his  band,  adding  to  them 
many  of  the  Salii,  against  the  plundering  Quadi,  who  though  they 
lived  on  what  they  stole,  yet  were  probably  less  expert  in  the  art 
of  robbing,  than  these  men  who  had  studied  it.  In  the  day  he 


72  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  in. 


guarded  the  open  fields,  and  killed  all  that  escaped  his  robbers. 
He  did  this  for  a  long  time,  until  the  Quadi  were  reduced  to  such 
extremities,  and  to  so  small  a  number,  that  they  and  their  general 
surrendered  themselves  to  Caesar,  who  had  taken  a  great  number 
of  prisoners  in  the  former  excursions  and  engagements,  and  among 
the  rest  the  son  of  their  king,  who  was  taken  by  Charietto. 
From  this  cause,  when  they  so  lamentably  petitioned  for  peace, 
and  Caesar  demanded  some  of  their  chiefs  as  hostages,  and  re- 
quired the  king's  son  to  be  one  of  them;  the  general,  or  king, 
broke  out  into  a  most  pathetic  complaint,  and  declared  with  tears 
in  his  eyes  that  his  son  was  one  that  had  been  lost  Caesar  per- 
ceiving this  compassionated  his  sorrow,  and  shewed  him  his  son 
who  had  been  nobly  entertained ;  but  told  him  that  he  would  re- 
tain the  youth  as  a  hostage  as  well  as  other  of  the  chiefs  whom  he 
had  in  possession.  He  condescended,  however,  to  make  peace 
with  them  on  condition  that  they  would  never  again  take  arms 
against  the  Romans. 

Caesar,  after  he  had  thus  settled  affairs,  added  the  Salii,  the 
Quadi,  and  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  Batavia  to  his  legions,  of 
whose  discipline  we  still  make  use.  Meanwhile  the  emperor  Con- 
stantius  was  in  the  east,  disposing  of  the  Persian  affairs,  and  in- 
tent only  on  the  wars' in  those  countries.  All  the  nations  beyond 
the  Alps  were  in  a  state  of  tranquillity,  from  the  prudent  ma- 
nagement of  Caesar ;  nor  were  either  Italy  or  Illyricum  in  any 
danger,  the  Barbarians  who  dwelt  beyond  the  Ister  being  fearful 
that  Caesar  would  come  through  Gaul,  and  pass  the  Ister  to  at- 
tack them  ;  they  therefore  contained  themselves  within  the  bounds 
of  moderation.  Constantius  being  thus  occupied,  the  Persians, 
under  their  king  Saphor,  at  that  time  ravaged  Mesopotamia;  and 
having  pillaged  all  the  places  about  Nisibis,  they  besieged  the 
city  itself  with  their  whole  forces.  Lucilianus,  the  commander, 
was  so  well  provided  for  a  siege,  that  partly  by  the  happy  occa- 
sions of  which  he  availed  himself,  and  partly  by  his  own  contri- 
vances, the  city  escaped  the  dangers  that  threatened  it.  The 
manner  in  which  this  was  effected,  I  have  thought  it  superfluous 
to  explain,  since  Julian  himself  has  given  a  relation  of  all  the 
transactions  of  those  times  in  a  particular  treatise,  in  which  thfe 
reader  may  easily  discern  the  eloquence  and  ability  of  its  author. 

At  this  juncture,  the  affaks  of  the  east  appearing  tranquil,  and 
the  splendid  actions  of  Julian  occupying  the  discourse  of  the  pub- 
lic, the  mind  of  Constantius  became  the  seat  of  the  most  bitter 
envy.  Being  mortified  at  the  prosperity  that  attended  all  that  had 
been  done  in  Celtica  and  Spain,  he  invented  pretexts,  by  which 


BOOK  HI.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  73 

he  might  gradually,  and  without  any  dishonour,  diminish  the  au- 
thority of  Julian,  and  then  deprive  him  of  his  dignity.  For  this 
purpose  he  sent  a  messenger  to  Caesar,  requiring  him  to  send  two 
of  the  Celtic  legions,  as  if  he  wanted  their  assistance.  Julian,  in 
obedience  to  his  order,  immediately  sent  them  away,  partly 
through  ignorance  of  his  design,  and  partly  because  he  wished  to 
avoid  giving  him  the  least  cause  of  anger.  After  this  he  took 
every  possible  care  of  the  affairs  of  Gaul,  while  the  army  daily 
increased,  and  the  Barbarians,  even  in  the  most  remote  part  of 
their  country,  were  in  such  dread  of  him,  that  they  did  not  even 
dream  of  making  war.  Constantius  afterwards  required  more 
legions  to  be  sent  to  him  from  Caesar,  and  having  obtained  the 
demand,  sent  for  four  other  companies  :  according  to  which  order 
Julian  gave  notice  to  the  soldiers  to  prepare  for  marching.  But 
while  Julian  was  at  Parisium,  a  small  town  in  Germany,  the  sol- 
diers, being  ready  to  march,  continued  at  supper  till  midnight  in 
a  place  near  the  palace,  which  they  so  called  there.  They  were 
as  yet  ignorant  of  any  design  against  Caesar,  when  some  tri- 
bunes, who  began  to  suspect  the  contrivance  against  him,  pri- 
vately distributed  a  number  of  anonymous  billets  among  the 
soldiers,  in  which  they  represented  to  them,  that  Caesar,  by 
his  judicious  conduct  had  so  managed  affairs,  that  almost  all  of 
them  had  erected  trophies  over  the  Barbarians ;  that  he  had  al- 
ways fought  like  a  private  soldier,  and  was  now  in  extreme  dan- 
ger from  the  emperor,  who  would  shortly  deprive  him  of  his 
whole  army,  unless  they  prevented  'it.  Some  of  the  soldiers 
having  read  these  billets,  and  published  the  intrigue  to  the  whole 
army,  all  were  highly  en  raged.  They  suddenly  rose  from  their  seats 
in  great  commotion,  and  with  the  cups  yet  in  their  hands  went 
to  the  palace.  Breaking  open  the  doors  without  ceremony,  they 
brought  out  Caesar,  and  lifting  him  on  a  shield  declared  him  em- 
peror and  Augustus.  They  then,  without  attending  to  his  reluct- 
ance, placed  a  diadem  upon  his  head. 

Julian  was  uneasy  at  what  they  had  done,  yet  did  not  think  it 
safe  to  reverse  it,  because  Constantius  would  not  observe  any  oath 
or  covenant,  or  any  obligation  by  which  men  are  bound  to  their 
word :  however,  he  determined  to  try  him.  He  therefore  sent 
ambassadors  to  inform  Constantius  that  he  had  been  declared  em- 
peror, without  his  own  concurrence,  and,  if  he  pleased,  was  ready 
to  lay  aside  his  diadem,  and  be  contented  with  the  sole  dignity 
of  being  Caesar.  Constantius  was  so  enraged  and  arrogant;  that 
he  told  the  ambassadors,  that  if  Julian  loved  his  life,  he  must  lay- 
aside  not  only  his  Imperial  dignity,  but  that  of  a  Csesar,  and  in 

VOL.  1.  NO.  1.  K 


74  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  in. 


a  private  capacity  submit  himself  to  the  emperor's  pleasure.  He 
should,  in  that  case,  receive  no  injury,  nor  suffer  what  his  auda- 
city merited.  Julian,  when  he  was  informed  of  this  by  the  am- 
bassadors, openly  shewed  his  opinion  of  the  deity,  and  declared 
that  he  would  rather  trust  his  life  and  fortune  with  the  gods  than 
with  Constantius.  From  this  time  the  enmity  of  Constantius  to 
Julian  was  openly  displayed  ;  for  Constantius  prepared  for  a  civil 
war;  while  Julian  at  the  same  time  was  grieved  that  such 
occurrences  should  happen;  because  if  he  fought -against  him 
from  whom  he  had  received  the  honour  of  a  Caesar,  he  would  by 
many  be  esteemed  an  ungrateful  person. 

While  he  was  making  these  reflections,  and  revolving  in  his 
own  mind  how  he  might  avoid  a  .civil  war,  the  gods  told 
him  what  should  occur  in  a  dream.  Being  at  Vienna,  the  Sun 
appeared  to  shew  him  the  constellations,  and  to  speak  these 
verses : 

When  Jupiter  th'  extremity  commands 
Of  moist  Aquarius,  and  Saturn  stands 
In  Virgo  twenty  five,  th'  Imperial  state 
,Of  high  Constantius  shall  be  closed  by  fate. 

Relying,  therefore,  on  this  vision,  he  conducted  public  business 
with  his  usual  diligence.  It  being' yet  winter,  betook  all  possible 
precautions  in  what  related  to  the  Barbarians,  that  if  he  should 
be  forced  to  undertake  any  new  enterprize,  Celtica  might  be  se- 
cure. At  the  same  time,  while  Constantius  continued  in  the 
east,  Julian  prepared  to  frustrate  his  design.  The  summer  being 
advanced,  he  had  no  sooner  settled  affairs  among  the  Barbarians 
beyond  the  Rhine,  having  in  part  forced  them  to  moderation  by 
the  sword,  and  partly  persuaded  them  by  experience  of  the  past 
to  prefer  peace  to  war,  than  he  put  his  army  in  a  posture  to  take 
a  long  journey ;  and  having  appointed ,  officers  both  civil  and 
military  to  govern  the  towns  and  the  bprders,  he  marched  his 
army  towards  the  Alps.  Upon  his  arrival  in  Rhaetia,  where  the 
river  Ister  rises,  which  runs  through  Noricum,  Pannonia,  Dacia, 
Mcssia,  and  Scythia,  until  it  empties  itself  in  the  Euxine  sea,  he 
constructed  a  number  of  boats,  and  with  three  thousand  of  his 
troops  sailed  down  the  Ister,  commanding  twenty  thousand  of 
them  to  march  by  land  to  Sirmium.  As  they  rowed  with  the 
stream,  and  had  the  advantage  of  the  annual  winds  called  Etesian 
he  arrived  on  the  eleventh  day  at  Sirmium.  When  it  was  re- 
ported there  that  the  emperor  was  arrived,  the  people  thought 
that  Constantius  was  the  person  kmeant ;  but  on  finding  that  it  was 


BOOK  HI.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  75 

Julian,  they  were  amazed,  as  if  they  had  taken  him  for  an  appa- 
rition. 

The  army  from  Celtica  having  joined  him,  he  wrote  to  the 
Roman  senate,  and  to  the  forces  in  Italy,  desiring  them  to  keep 
their  cities  safe,  he  being  the  emperor.  As  Taurus  and  Florentius, 
the  consuls  for  that  year,  left  Rome  as  soon  as  they  heard  that 
Julian  had  crossed  the  Alps  into  Pannonia,  he  ordered  them  to 
be  stiled  the  fugitive  consuls  in  all  public  instruments.  He  be- 
haved with  great  kindness  to  all  the  towns  he  passed  through, 
and  though  in  great  haste,  gave  them  all  good  expectations  of 
him.  He  likewise  wrote  to  the  Athenians,  the  Lacedaemonians, 
and  the  Corinthians,  to  inform  triem  of  the  reason  of  his  approach. 
When  he  was  at  Sirmium,  there  came  to  him  ambassadors  from 
all  Greece,  to  whom  he  gave  such  answers  as  were  worthy  of 
him*,  and  granted  all  their  reasonable  demands.  He  then  marched 
forward  with  his  Celtic  forces,  and  others  which  he  had  raised  at 
Sirmium,  and  the  legions  that  were  stationed  in  Pannonia  and 
Moesia. 

Arriving  atNaisus,  he  consulted  the  soothsayers  what  measures 
to  pursue.  As  the  entrails  signified  that  he  must  stay  there  for 
some  time,  he  obeyed,  observing  likewise  the  time  that  was  men- 
tioned in  his  dream.  When  this,  according  to  the  motion  of  the 
planets,  was  arrived,  a  party  of  horsemen  arrived  from  Constan- 
tinople at  Naisus,  with  intelligence  that  Constantius  was  dead, 
and  that  the  armies  desired  Julian  to  be  emperor. 

Upon  this  he  accepted  what  the  gods  had  bestowed  upon  him, 
and  proceeded  on  his  journey.  On  his  arrival  at  Byzantium,  he 
was  received  with  joyful  acclamations  by  all  ranks  of  the  people, 
who  called  him  their  beloved  fellow-citizen,  he  being  born  and 
brought  up  in  that  city,  and  shewed  him  every  Jdnd  of  respect, 
as  a  person  who  was  likely  to  be  the  author  of  much  good  to 
mankind.  He  here  provided  for  the  advantage  both  of  the  city 
and  the  army :  he  conferred  on  the  city  the  privilege  of  electing 
a  senate  like  that  of  Rome;  he  also  constructed  there  a  harbour 
to  secure  ships  from  the  south  wind,  and  a  portico  leading  to  the 
port.  He  built  a  library  to  the  Imperial  portico,  in  which  he 
placed  all  the  books  he  possessed  ;  and  having  done  this,  he  pre- 
pared for  the  Persian  war.  After  having  remained  ten  months  in 
Byzantium,  he  appointed  Hormisdas  and  Victor  to  the  command 
of  his  armies,  and  proceeded  to  Antioch.  It  is  unnecessary  to 
relate  with  what  pleasure  and  enthusiasm  the  soldiers  performed 
this  journey  :  for  it  is  not  probable  that  they  would  be  guilty  of 
any  improprieties  under  such  an  emperor  as  Julian.  Upon  his 


7<>  THE  HISTORY BOOK  in. 

arrival  at  Antioch,he  was  joyfully  received  by  the  people.  But 
being  naturally  great  lovers  of  spectacles  and  public  amusements, 
and  more  accustomed  to  pleasure  than  to  serious  affairs,  they  were 
not  pleased  with  the  emperor's  general  prudence  and  modesty. 
He  indeed  avoided  entering  the  public  theatres,  and  would  seldom 
see  plays,  and  when  he  did,  would  not  sit  at  them  the  whole  day: 
on  which  account  they  spoke  disrespectfully  of  him,  and  offended 
him.  He  revenged  himself  on  them,  not  by  any  real  punishment, 
but  by  composing  a  very  spirited  oration  ;  which  contains  so  much 
satire  and  keenness,  that  it  will  serve  as  a  perpetual  lampoon  on 
the  Antiochians.  Being  penitent  for  their  offence,  the  emperor, 
after  doing  for  the  city  all  the  favours  which  equity  would  allow 
him,  granted  to  it  a  senate,  the  members  of  which  succeeded  by 
hereditary  descent  from  father  to  son,  admitting  likewise  those 
that  were  born  of  the  daughters  of  senators  into  the  same  body; 
a  privilege  which  few  cities  possess.  After  these,  and  many 
other  just  and  noble  actions,  he  prepared  to  make  war  on  Persia. 
When  the  winter  was  past,  having  collected  his  forces;  and 
sent  them  before  him  in  the  usual  manner  of  marching,  he  de- 
parted from  Antioch,  though  without  encouragement  from  the 
oracle.  The  reason  of  this  failure  it  is  in  my  power  to  explain, 
yet  I  pass  it  over  in  silence.  He  arrived  on  the  fifth  day  at 
Hierapolis,  where  he  had  ordered  all  the  ships  to  assemble,  which 
used  to  navigate  the  Euphrates  from  Samosata  and  other  places. 
Having  given  the  command  of  them  to  Hierius,  one  of  his  officers, 
he  sent  him  forward,  but  stayed  himself  in  Hierapolis  three  days. 
He  then  proceeded  to  Batnae  a  small  town  in  Osdroene,  where 
the  Edesenes  met,  him  in  crouds  presenting  him  with  a  crown, 
and  welcoming  him  to  their  city  with  joyful  acclamations.  He 
accepted  of  their  kindness,  and  entering  the  city,  he  made  whatever 
regulations  he  thought  useful,  and  went  on  to  Carrae.  As  there 
were  two  roads  from  thence,  one  across  the  Tigris  and  through 
the  city  of  Nisibis  into  the  provinces  of  Adrabene,  the  other  over 
the  Euphrates  and  by  Circesium,  which  is  a  fortress  surrounded  by 
that  river  on  the  borders  of  Syria,  the  emperor  was  doubtful 
which  way  to  chuse.  In  the  mean  time  intelligence  was  brought 
that  the  Persians  had  made  an  incursion  into  the  Roman  territory. 
This  produced  some  alarm  in  the  camp.  The  emperor,  however, 
understood  that  they  were  not  a  regular  army  but  marauders,  who 
took  and  carried  off  whatever  fell  in  their  way.  He  therefore  re- 
solved to  leave  a  sufficient  guard  in  the  places  near  the  Tigris,  to 
prevent  the  Persians  from  taking  advantage  of  the  army  accompany- 
ing him  by  the  other  route  into  their  dominions,  and  thus  pillaging 


BOOK  in.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  77 

Nisibis  and  all  that  quarter  without  opposition.  He  therefore 
thought  it  prudent  to  leave  in  that  country  eighteen  thousand  men 
under  the  command  of  Sebastianus  and  Procopius,  while  he  him- 
self crossed  the  Euphrates  with  the  main  body  of  his  forces  in 
two  divisions.  He  thus  rendered  them  fully  prepared  to  oppose 
the  enemy  wherever  they  should  meet  with  them,  and  prevent  the 
devastations  which  they  committed  wherever  they  came. 

Having  made  these  arrangements  at  Carras,  a  town  that  separates 
the  Roman  from  the  Assyrian  dominions,  he  had  an  inclination 
to  view  the  army  from  some  eminence,  the  infantry  and  cavalry 

4f  which  in  the  whole  amounted  to  sixty-five  thousand  men. 
Departing  therefore  from  Carra,  he  presently  passed  the  castles 
between  that  place  and  Callinicum,  and  arriving  at  Circesium, 
of  which  I  spoke  above,  crossed  the  river  Aboras  and  sailed 
over  the  Euphrates.  He  was  followed  by  his  troops  carrying 
provisions  along  with  them,  who  likewise  embarked  according  to 
the  orders  they  received.  The  navy  was  by  this  time  come  up; 
it  consisted  of  a  great  number  of  vessels ;  six  hundred  were  made 
of  wood,  and  five  hundred  of  skins,  besides  which  were  fifty 
ships  of  war,  and  others  that  followed  them  for  the  construction 
of  bridges,  if  requisite,  that  the  army  should  pass  the  rivers  on  foot. 
A  great  number  of  other  vessels  likewise  followed,  some  of  them 
carrying  provisions  for  the  army,  others  timber  for  the  construc- 
tion of  engines,  and  some  battering  engines  for  a  siege  which  were 

-ready  made.  Lucilianus  and  Constantius  were  admirals  of  this 
navy.  The  army  being  thus  disposed,  the  emperor  seated  him- 
self on  a  throne,  and  made  an  address  to  the  army  ;  after  which 
he  gave  each  of  them  a  hundred  and  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  He  then 
proceeded  towards  Persia,  giving  the  command  of  the  infantry  to 
Victor,  and  that  of  the  cavalry  to  Hormisdas  and  Arintheus  jointly. 
I  have  before  related  of  this  Hormisdas,  that  he  was  the  son  of 
a  Persian  monarch,  but  was  persecuted  by  his  brother,  and  had* 
escaped  to  the  emperor  Constantine,  from  whom  he  had  received 
the  highest  honours  and  preferments  in  reward  for  hrs  approved 
friendship  and  fidelity. 

The  emperor,  on  entering  Persia,  placed  the  cavaliy  on  tl*e 
right,  and  proceeded  along  the  bank  of  the  river,  the  rear  guard 
marching  at  the  distance  of  seventy  stadia.  Between  these  and 
the  main  body  were  placed  the  beasts  of  burden,  which  carried 
the  heavy  armour  and  provisions,  the  attendants,  that  they  might 
be  secure,  being  inclosed  on  every  side  by  the  army.  Hav- 
ing thus  arranged  the  order  of  his  march,  he  thought  proper  to 
send  before  him  fifteen  hundred  men,  in  order  to  reconnoitre  and 


78  THE  HISTORY     BOOK  in. 

observe  whether  any  enemy  approached  either  openly  or  in  am- 
buscade. Of  these  he  made  Lucilianus  captain.  Then  advanc- 
ing sixty  stadia  he  arrived  at  a  place  called  Lantha,  and  from 
thence  to  Dura,  where  were  perceived  the  ruins  of  a  city,  which 
was  then  deserted,  and  the  sepulchre  of  the  emperor  Gordianus. 
In  this  place  the  soldiers  found  abundance  of  deer,  which  they 
shot  and  feasted  on  with  great  satisfaction.  From  thence  he  pro- 
ceeded in  seven  day's  to  a  place  called  Phathusae,  opposite  to 
which  was  an  island  in  the  river,  wherein  was  a  castle  containing 
a  great  number  of  men.  He  therefore  ordered  Lucilianus  with 
a  thousand  of  his  advanced  guard  to  attack  it.  While  it  con-$ 
tinued  dark,  the  assailants  proceeded  without  discovery,  but  as 
soon  as  it  was  day,  being  perceived  by  one  that  came  from  out 
of  the  castle  to  fetch  water,  the  garrison  was  dreadfully  alarmed. 
They  all  immediately  mounted  the  ramparts,  until  the  emperor 
came  into  the  island  with  his  engines  and  part  of  the  army,  and 
promised  the  besieged,  that  if  they  would  surrender  themselves 
and  the  castle,  they  would  escape  certain  death.  They  accord- 
ingly surrendered,  and  were  sent  by  the  emperor  into  the  Roman 
dominions  conducted  rjy  a  guard  of  soldiers.  Their  captain 
Puseus  was  not  only  made  a  tribune  in  the  army,  but  on  account 
of  his  fidelity  was  taken  by  the  emperor  into  a  familiarity  which 
always  subsisted. 

Some  distance  from  this  he  found  another  island  in  the  same 
river,  in  which  was  another  strong  fortress,  which  he  attacked, 
but  found  it  unassailable  on  every  side,  and  therefore  demanded 
the  garrison  to  surrender,  and  avoid  the  risk  of  being  sacked. 
To  which  they  replied  that  they  would  regulate  their  conduct  by 
that  of  others.  He  therefore  proceeded  on  to  other  fortresses 
which  he  passed  by,  being  satisfied  with  such  promises.  For  he 
did  not  think  it  profitable  to  waste  too  much  time  in  small  af- 
fairs, but  considered  it  the  best  course  to  hasten  and  prepare  for 
the  main  business  of  the  war.  After  a  few  days  march  he  ar- 
rived at  Dacira,  a  town  on  the  right  hand,  sailing  down  the  Eu- 
phrates. The  soldiers,  finding  this  place  forsaken  by  its  inhabi- 
tants, took  away  a  large  quantity  of  corn  that  was  laid  there,  and 
many  other  things.  Having  put  to  death  all  the  women  that  re- 
mained in  it,  they  so  completely  razed  the  buildings,  that  no  one  on 
seeing  the  place  could  imagine  a  town  ever  to  have  stood  there. 
To  conclude  my  account  of  this  place  and  its  vicinity,  I  must 
mention,  that  on  the  opposite  shore  was  a  foundation  of  bitumen. 
He  from  thence  advanced  to  Sitha,  Megia,  and  the  city  of  Zara- 
gardia,  in  which  was  a  lofty  throne  made  of  stone,  which  the  in- 


BOOK  in.  OFZOS1MUS. 79 

habitants  used  to  call  the  throne  of  Trajan.  The  soldiers,  hav- 
ing with  ease  plundered  and  burnt  this  city,  spent  that  and  the 
following  day  in  recreation. 

The  emperor  in  the  mean  time  was  surprized,  that  his  army 
had  advanced  so  far  without  meeting  with  any  Persians  either  in 
ambuscade  or  in  the  open  field;  and  therefore  sent  Hormisdas 
with  a  party  to  reconnoitre,  because  he  was  best  acquainted 
with  the  country.  In  this  expedition  Hormisdas  and  his  soldiers 
were  all  near  perishing,  had  they  not  been  unexpectedly  preserv- 
ed by  a  fortunate  accident.  A  person  called  Surenas,  which  is 
a  title  of  disctintion  among  the  Persians,  hail  planted  an  ambus- 
cade in  a  particular  place,  expecting  Hormisdas  and  his  troop  to 
pass  that  way,  arid  intending  to  surprize  them  as  they  passed. 
This  hope  would  have  been  successful,  had  not  the  Euphrates 
burst  its  banks,  and  running  between  the  enemy  and  Hormisdas, 
obstructed  the  march  of  his  men.  Being  compelled  by  this 
cause  to  defer  the  journey,  the  following  day  they  discovered 
the  ambuscade  of  Surenas  and  his  troops,  with  whom  they  en- 
gaged. Having  killed  many,  and  put  to  flight  others,  they 
admitted  the  remainder  of  them  into  their  own'army.  They  pro- 
ceeded from  thence  to  a  branch  of  the  Euphrates,  which  reaches 
as  far  as  Assyria,  and  joins  the  Tigris.  Here  the  army  found  a 
stiff  clay  and  marshy  ground,  in  which  the  horses  could  not  move 
without  difficulty.  As  they  could  not  swim  across  the  river  in 
their  armour,  nor  ford  through  it  being  deep  and  full  of  mud, 
they  did  not  know  how  to  extricate  themselves.  Their  difficul- 
ties were  increased  by  the  appearance  of  the  enemy  on  the  oppo- 
site bank,  who  were  prepared  to  obstruct  their  passage  with  darts 
and  stones,  which  they  threw  with  slings.  When  no  other  per- 
son could  imagine  an  expedient  to  free  them  from  those  immi- 
nent dangers,  the  emperor  himself,  who  had  great  sagacity  in  all 
things,  and  was  well  versed  in  military  affairs,  determined  on  or- 
dering Lucilianus  and  his  reconnoitring  party  to  make  an  attack 
on  the  enemy's  rear,  and  thereby  create  a  diversion,  until  the 
army  had  crossed  the  river.  For  this  purpose  he  sent  Victor, 
with  a  competent  number  of  men.  He  began  his  journey  in  the 
night,  that  the  enemy  mightnot  discover  him,  and  when  he  had 
proceeded  so  far  that  the  enemy  could  not  perceive  him  even  in  the 
•day,  he  crossed  the  channel  to  seek  Lucilianus  and  his  party. 
Continuing  to  advance  without  meeting  an  enemy,  he  called  out 
loudly  to  his  countrymen,  and  sounded  the  trumpets  for  them  to 
hear  him.  He  succeeded  in  meeting  Lucilianus,  who  judging  the 
intent  of  his  coming,  joined  his  force  to  that  of  Victor,  and  at- 


*0  THE  HISTORY    BOOK  in. 

tacked  the  .enemy  by  surprize  in  the  rear.  Being  so  unexpectedly 
assaulted  they  were  either  slain,  or  made  their  escape  in  what- 
ever manner  they  could.  The  emperor,  perceiving  the  success  of 
this  manoeuvre,  passed  the  river  without  opposition,  and  con- 
tinued his  march,  until  he  arrived  at  a  city  called  Bersabora,  the 
size  and  situation  of  which  he  examined.  It  was  enclosed  by  , 
two  circular  walls.  In  the  midst  of  it  was  a  citadel  with  another 
wall,  shaped  like  the  segment  of  a  circle,  to  which  there  was  a 
communication  from  the  inner  wall  of  the  city,  very  difficult  of 
ascent.  On  the  south-west  sicle  of  the  city  was  a  winding  road  ; 
and  on  the  north  side  a  broad  channel  from  the  river,  by  which 
the  inhabitants  were  supplied  with  water.  On  the  east  side  it 
was  encompassed  by  a  deep  ditch  and  a  mound  supported  by 
strong  pieces  of  timber  ;  along  this  ditch  stood  large  towers, 
which  were  built  half  way  from  the  ground  of  bricks  cemented 
with  a  kind  of  bituminous  loam;  the  upper  half  of  the  same 
kind  of  brick  with  plaister. 

The  emperor  resolving  to  take  this  city,  he  encouraged  his  sol- 
diers to  the  attempt.  They  obeyed  his  orders  with  great  alacrity. 
On  this  the  citizens  solicited  the  emperor  to  receive  them  into 
his  favour  and  protection  ;  requesting  at  one  time  that  he  would 
send  Hormisdas  to  treat  with  them  of  peace,  and  presently  re- 
viling the  same  person  as  a  fugitive  renegado  and  a  traitor  to  his 
country.  The  emperor,  with  good  reason,  being  incensed  at  this, 
commanded  his  troops  to  attend  to  their  duty,  and  to  carry  on  the 
siege  with  full  vigour.  None  of  them  failed  in  the  execution  of 
their  duty,  until  the  besieged,  finding  themselves  unable  to  defend 
their  walls,  fled  into  the  citadel.  The  emperor,  on  seeing  this, 
sent  his  troops  into  the  city,  which  was  now  deserted  of  in- 
habitants. They  destroyed  the  walls,  burnt  the  houses,  and 
planted  engines  at  the  most  convenient  places,  with  which  they 
threw  darts  and  stones  on  those  in  the  fort.  The  besieged 
kept  the  assailants  at  a  distance  with  darts  and  stones,  which  they 
threw  back  against  them,  so  that  great  slaughter  was  occasioned 
on  bothsides.  The  emperor,  either  by  his  own  ingenuity, on  con- 
sideration of  the  situation  of  the  place,  or  by  means  of  his  exten- 
sive experience,  constructed  an  engine  of  the  follow  ing  description: 
He  fastened  together  great  pieces  of  timber  with  iron,  in  form  of 
a  square  tower.  This  he  placed  against  the  wall  of  the  citadej, 
till  it  gradually  became  of  equal  height.  In  this  tower  he  placed 
archers  and  engineers,  accustomed  to  fling  darts  and  stones.  The 
Persians  being  thus  harrassed  on  all  sides,  both  by  the  besiegers 
and  by  those  in  the  tower,  were  compelled,  after  a  short  resistance, 


BOOK  in.  OF  ZOSfMUS. 


81 


to  promise  that,  if  tlie  emperor  would  offer  them  any  reasonable 
terms,  they  would  surrender  the  citadel.  It  was  therefore  agreed 
that,  upon  surrendering  the  citadel  to  the  emperor,  all  the  Per- 
sians in  the  place  should  pass  without  molestation  through  the 
midst  of  the  Roman  army,  and  should  each  receive  a  sum  of  mo- 
ney and  a  garment.  About  five  thousand  men  were  suffered  to 
depart,  besides  those' who  had  escaped  in  boats  over  the  river. 
The  soldiers,  upon  searching  the  citadel,  discovered  a  vast  quan- 
tity of  corn,  arms  and  military  engines  of  all  kinds,  and  houshold 
furniture  and  provisions  in  abundance.  Of  all  these  they  dis- 
posed as  they  chose,  except  that  the  greater  part  of  the  corn  was 
put  on  board  ships  for  the  maintenance  of  the  soldiers,  the  re- 
mainder being  divided  between  them  in  addition  to  their  usual  al- 
lowance. The  weapons  that  were  calculated  for  the  use  of  Ro- 
mans were  distributed  to  the  soldiers.  Those  that  were  adapted 
only  to  the  Persian  manner  of  fighting  were  either  burnt  or 
thrown  into  the  river. 

By  this  action  the  renown  of  the  Romans  was  considerably 
augmented  ;  so  great  a  city,  being  next  to  Ctesiphon  the  most  im- 
portant in  Assyria,  and  so  strongly  fortified,  being  taken  by  assault 
in  two  days.  For  this  reason  the  emperor  highly  commended  the 
soldiers,  and  treated  them  with  great  kindness,  distributing  to 
each  man  a  hundred  pieces  of  silver.  Meanwhile  Surenas,  ad- 
vancing with  a  large  army  from  a  town  in  Assyria,  surprised  the 
reconnoitring  party  in  advance  of  the  army,  killed  one  of  the  three 
tribunes  and  some  of  his  men,  and  put  the  remainder  to  flight, 
carrying  off  a  military  ensign  which  was  in  the  form  of  a  dragon, 
such  as  the  Romans  usually  carry  in  war.  The  emperor  on  learn- 
ing this  was  much  displeased,  and  in  his  anger  attacked  the 
forces  of  Surenas,  compelled  all  to  fly  that  could  escape,  retook 
the  ensign  which  the  enemy  had  carried  off,  and  coming  imme- 
diately to  the  city  where  Surenas  had  surprised  the  party, 
stormed,  took,  and  burnt  it.  As  the  commander  of  the  party, 
preferring  his  own  safety  to  the  valour  and  honour  of  a  Roman, 
had  left  his  standard  in  the  enemy's  hands,  he  deprived  him  of 
his  girdle,  regarding  him  as  a  mean  and  worthless  person,  to- 
gether with  all  who  had  accompanied  him  in  his  flight. 

On  bis  advance  beyond  the  river,  he  arrived  at  a  place  near  a 
city  called  Tissenia.  This  was  surrounded  by  a  ditch,  which, 
though  very  deep,  the  Persians  filled  with  a  large  quantity  of 
water,  which  they  procured  from  the  neighbouring  river,  called 
the  King's  River.  This  city  he  passed  without  halting,  because  it 
shewed  no  appearance  of  hostility,  and  went  through  a  place,. 

VOL.  1.   NO.  2.  L 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  in. 


where  was  a  morass  formed  by  art,  the  Persians  having  imagined 
that  by  cutting  a  sluice  to  admit  the  water  of  the  river,  they 
could  form  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  the  army  by 
that  route.  The  emperor  leading  the  way,  the  army  followed 
him  though  up  to  their  knees  in  water,  being  restrained  by  shame 
from  hesitating  to  follow  the  example  of  the  emperor.  After 
sun-set,  the  army  halted  in  the  neighbourhood  ;  while  the  em- 
peror commanding  some  of  the  soldiers  and  artificers  to  follow 
him,  cut  down  trees,  with  which  he  constructed  a  bridge  over 
the  sluice,  and  throwing  earth  into  the  fens  filled  up  the  deep 
places,  and  widened  the  narrow  passages.  He  afterwards  led  his 
army  through  with  great  ease,  'until  he  arrived  at  a  town  called 
Bithra,  in  which  was  a  palace,  and  room  enough  for  the  accom- 
modation both  of  the  emperor  and  his  army. 

Departing  from  thence,  with  the  same  pains  as  before,  he  went 
before  his  men,  thus  rendering  the  way  more  tolerable  to  them. 
By  this  means  he  led  them  along,  until  he  came  to  a  grove  of 
palm-trees,  amongst  which  vines  were  growing.  These  climbed 
to  the  tops  of  the  palms,  thus  exhibiting  to  their  view  the  fruit 
of  the  palm  mixed  with  clusters  of  grapes.  Having  passed  the 
night  in  this  place,  the  next  morning  he  continued  his  route, 
Approaching  too  near  to  a  castle,  he  was  in  danger  of  receiving 
a  mortal  wound  from  a  Persian,  who  issuing  from  the  castle  with 
his  sword  in  his  hand,  aimed  a  stroke  at  the  emperor's  head. 
Observing  this,  he  placed  his  shield  on^  his  head  and  warded  off 
the  blow.  The  soldiers  immediately  fell  on  the  Persian,  and 
killed  him  with  all  his  companions,  except  a  few  who  escaped 
through  the  enemy's  ranks  into  the  castle.  The  emperor  being 
enraged  at  this  audacious  attempt,  walked  round  the  castle  to 
examine  whether  it  were  in  any  part  assailable.  While  he  was 
thus  employed,  Surenas  attacked  the  soldiers,  who  remained  in 
the  palm-grove,  before  they  knew  of  his  approach,  hoping  by 
that  means  not  only  to  get  possession  of  all  their  beasts  of  burden 
and  carriages,  but  to  divert  the  emperor  from  the  siege  of  the 
castle.  He  was  disappointed  in  both  parts  of  his  project.  For 
the  emperor  thought  the  capture  of  the  castle  an  important  ob- 
ject, because  there  was  near  it  a  populous  city  called  Besuchis; 
besides  many  other  castles,  the  inhabitants  of  which  had  fled  into 
that  which  the  emperor  was  besieging,  their  own  not  being  strong 
enough  to  protect  them  ;  except  some  who  fled  to  Ctesiphon,  or 
hid  themselves  in  the  thickest  part  of  the  grove. 

For  this  reason  the  emperor  besieged  it,  while  in  the  mean  time 
that  part  of  the  army,  which  was  sent  out  to  reconnoitre  and 


BOOK  in.  OF  ZOSIMUS, 


scour  the  country,  defeated  all  who  opposed  them,  and  rendered 

the  emperor  secure  during  the  continuance  of  the  siege.      Some 

of  the  fugitives  having  taken  refuge  among  the  fens  in  the  grove, 

did  not  escape  the   reconnoitring  parties,  who  killed  some  and 

made  the  rest  prisoners.     They  who  were  besieged  in  the  castle 

kept  off  the  enemy  with  darts  of  all  kinds,  and  because  they  had 

no  stones  within,  they  made  balls  of  pitch  which  they  set  on  fire 

and  flung  at  the  besiegers;   nor  was  it  difficult  to  hit  those  they 

aimed  at,  as  they  threw  from  above,  at  a  great  multitude  collected 

together.     The  Roman  soldiers,  however,   omitted   no  kind  of 

warlike  policy,  but  retained  their  usual  courage.     They  threw 

and  shot  at  the  enemy  great  stones  and  darts,  out  of  engines  as 

well  as  bows;  and  those  were  contrived  to  strike  several  persons 

at  one  throw.     The  castle  being  situated  on  a  hill,  and  fortified 

with  two  walls,  sixteen  large  towers,   and  surrounded  by  a  deep 

ditch,  which  in  one  part  was  introduced  into  the  castle  to  furnish 

its  inhabitants  with  water,  the  emperor  ordered  his  soldiers  to 

collect  earth  enough  to  fill  up  the  ditch,  and  raise  on  it  a  mount 

to  the  height  of  one  of  the  towers.     He  likewise  resolved  to  make 

a  mine  under  the  wall,  beyond  the  inner  precinct,  for  the  pur- 

pose of  surprising  the  enemy.     The  enemy  obstructed  those  who 

were  raising  the  mount  by  continually  casting  darts  upon  them  ; 

the  emperor,  therefore,  himself  invented  means  of  defence  against 

the  darts  and  fire-balls.     He  left  the  care  of  the  mine  and  raising 

the  mount  to  Nevita  and  Dagalaiphus.      Then  giving  to  Victor 

the    command  of  a  detachment  of  horse  and  foot,  he  ordered 

him  to  reconnoitre  the  whole  country  between  that  place  and 

Ctesiphon  ;  and  if  any  enemy  should  appear  with  the  design  of 

attempting  to  divert  the  emperor  from  the  siege,  to  frustrate  any 

such  attempt;    and  likewise  by  bridges  and  other  improvements 

to  render  the  road  from  thence  to   Ctesiphon  more  easy  for  the 

march  of  the  army. 

Having  thus  assigned  to  his  officers  their  respective  charges, 
he  planted  his  battering-rams  against  one  of  the  gates,  which  he 
broke  to  pieces.  Perceiving  that  those  to  whom  the  care  of  the 
mine  was  committed  were  slothful,  and  negligent  of  their  charge, 
he  removed  them,  as  a  disgrace  for  their  remissness,  and  substi- 
tuted others  in  their  place.  He  afterwards  brought  the  rams 
against  another  gate,  which  was  too  weak  to  bear  the  shock  ; 
when  there  came  a  messenger  with  information,  that  they  who 
were  ordered  to  construct  a  mine  from  the  ditch  into  the  town 
had  completed  their  task,  and  were  just  ready  to  issue  through  it. 
The  men  employed  in  the  mine  were  of  three  regiments,  the. 


84  THE  HISTORY  JJOOK  m. 

Mattiarii,  the  Laccinarii,  and  the  Victores.  The  emperor,  how- 
ever, suspended  the  attack  a  short  time,  while  he  commanded  an 
engine  to  be  brought  against  another  gate,  where  he  planted  all 
his  army,  to  induce  the  enemy  to  believe  that  on  the  following 
day  he  intended  with  that  engine  to  storm  the  castle ;  his  real 
design  being  to  divert  the  attention  of  the  Persians  from  the  mine. 
All  that  were  in  the  castle  were  therefore  wholly  occupied  in 
destroying  that  engine,  while  the  party  in  the  mine,  having  dug 
quite  through  to  the  surface,  issued  from  it  at  midnight  in  the 
middle  of  a  house,  in  which  was  a  woman  grinding  corn.  She 
was  immediately  killed  by  the  man  who  first  sprang  out,  because 
she  attempted  to  cry  out.  The  name  of  the  soldier  who  did  this 
was  Superantius,  an  excellent  soldier  in  the  regiment  of  Victores, 
the  next  to  him  was  Magnus,  then  Jovianus,  a  tribune  in  the 
regiment  of  the  Notarii.  These  were  followed  by  many  others. 
The  passage  being  widened,  they  all  presently  entered  into  the 
midst  of  the  place,  from  whence  they  ran  to  the  wall,  and  sur- 
prised the  Persians,  who  in  the  manner  of  the  country  were 
singing  in  praise  of  the  valour  of  their  king,  and  speaking  con- 
temptuously of  the  vain  attempt  of  the  Roman  emperor ;  and 
boasting  that  he  might  sooner  take  the  palace  of  Jupiter  than 
their  castle.  The  Romans  now  attacked  them,  and  killing  all  they 
met  with  by  throwing  them  over  the  wall,  they  pursued  the  rest, 
and  put  them  to  death  in  various  manners  ;  sparing  neither  wo- 
men nor  children,  except  a  few  whom  they  preserved  for  slaves. 
Anabdates,  the  governor  of  the  castle,  being  taken 'while  endea- 
vouring to  escape,  together  with  his  guards,  eighty  in  number, 
was  brought  to  the  emperor  with  his  hands  bound.  The  castle 
being  thus  taken,  and  all  the  people  put  to  death,  except  a  few 
who  were  unexpectedly  saved,  the  soldiers  began  to  plunder; 
and  having  taken  all  they  could  find,  levelled  the  wall  to  the 
ground,  with  the  engines  they  had  placed  against  it.  Nor  even 
then  were  they  satisfied,  but  pulled  down  and  burnt  all  the 
buildings  in  such  a  manner,  that  no  one  could  imagine  that  there 
had  ever  been  any  in  that  place. 

Marching  from  thence,  he  passed  other  castles  of  little  im- 
portance, and  came  to  an  inclosed  place  called  the  King's  Chace. 
This  was  a  large  space  of  ground  surrounded  by  a  wall,  and 
planted  with  all  kind  of  trees,  in  which  were  wild<beasts  of  every 
description,  which  were  supplied  with  provender  ;  they  being 
kept  solely  for  the  king's  hunting  whenever  he  was  disposed  for 
that  diversion.  Julian  ordered  the  wall  to  be  broken  down  in 
several  places ;  which  gave  the  soldiers  an  opportunity  of  ahoot- 


BOOK    III, 


OF  ZOSIMLfS.  85 


ing  the  deer  as  they  ran  by  them*  He  likewise  found  near  this 
place  a  palace  magnificently  built  in  the  Roman  manner.  He 
would  not  suffer  the  tribunes  to  deface  any  part  of  it,  through 
respect  to  its  founders. 

The  army  from  hence  passed  by  several  castles,  and  arrived  at 
a  city  of  Armenia  called  Sabatha,  which  is  thirty  stadia  from  that 
which  was  formerly  called  Zochasa,  but  now  Seleucia.  While 
the  emperor  remained  with  the  greatest  part  of  his  army  in  a 
neighbouring  place,  the  advanced-guard  had  stormed  the  town. 
Next  day,  the  emperor  walking  about  its  walls,  saw  several  bodies 
suspended  on  gibbets  before  the  gates,  which  the  natives  said 
were  the  relations  of  one  who  had  been  accused  of  betraying  a 
town  to  the  Persians,  which  had  been  taken  by  the  emperor 
Car  us.  This  reminded  the  emperor  to  summon  Anabdates,  the 
governor  of  the  castle,  to  trial ;  he  having  grossly  deceived  the 
Roman  army  by  promising  to  assist  them  in  the  war  against 
Persia.  He  was  then  accused  of  a  fresh  offence,  having  spoken 
maliciously  of  Hormisdas,  called  him  a  traitor  before  a  number 
of  persons,  and  said  that  he  was  the  author  of  that  expedition 
against  the  Persians,  He  was  therefore  put  to  death. 

Soon  after  his  execution,  the  army  marched  to  Arintheus,  and 
searching  all  the  marshes  found  in  them  many  people  whom  they 
made  prisoners.  Here  it  was  that  the  Persians  first  collected 
their  forces,  and  attacked  the  advanced  party  of  the  Roman  army* 
They  were  however  routed,  and  preserved  their  lives  by  flying  to 
a  neighbouring  city.  The  Persians  on  the  other  side  of  the  river 
attacked'the  slaves  who  had  the  care  of  the  beasts  of  burden,  and 
those  who  guarded  them  ;  they  killed  part  of  them  and  made  the 
rest  prisoners.  This  being  the  first  loss  which  the  Romans  had  sus- 
tained occasioned  some  consternation  in  the  army.  They  ad- 
vanced to  a  very  broad  sluice  or  channel,  said  by  the  country 
people  to  have  been  cut  by  Trajan,  when  he  made  an  expedition 
into  Persia.  In  this  channel  runs  the  river  Narmalaches,  and 
discharges  itself  into  the  Tigris.  The  emperor  caused  it  to  be 
cleansed,  in  order  to  enable  his  vessels  to  pass  through  it  into  the 
Tigris,  and  constructed  bridges  over  it  for  the  passage  of  his 
army.  While  this  was  in  agitation,  a  great  force  of  Persians, 
both  horse  and  foot,  was  collected  on  the  opposite  bank,  to  pre- 
vent their  passage  should  it  be  attempted.  The  emperor,  dis- 
cerning these  preparations  of  the  enemy,  was  anxious  to  cross 
over  to  them,  and  hastily  commanded  his  troops  to  go  on  board  the 
vessels.  Perceiving,  however,  the  opposite  bank  to  be  unusually 
lofty,  and  a  kind  of  fence  at  the  top  of  it,  which  formerly  served 


86  THfe  HISTORY BOOK  in. 

as  an  inclosure  to  the  king's  garden,  but  at  this  time  was  a  rampart, 
they  exclaimed  that  they  were  afraid  of  the  fire-balls  and  darts 
that  were  thrown  down.  The  emperor,  however,  being  very  reso- 
lute, two  barges  crossed  over  full  of  foot  soldiers  ;  which  the  Per- 
sians immediately  set  on  fire  by  throwing  down  on  them  a  great 
number  of  flaming  darts.  This  so  increased  the  terror  of  the  army, 
that  the  emperor  was  obliged  to  conceal  his  error  by  a  feint, 
saying,  "  They  are  landed  and  have  rendered  themselves  master* 
of  the  bank  ;  I  know  it  by  the  fire  in  their  ships,  which  I  ordered 
them  to  make  as  a  signal  of  victory."  He  had  no  sooner  said 
this,  than  without  further  preparations  they  embarked  in  the 
ships  and  crossed  over,  until  they  arrived  where  they  could  ford 
the  river,  and  then  leaping  into  the  water,  they  engaged  the  Per* 
sians  so  fiercely,  that  they  not  only  gained  possession  of  the 
bank,  but  recovered  the  two  ships  which  came  over  first,  and  were 
now  half  burnt,  and  saved  all  the  men  who  were  left  in  them. 
The  armies  then  attacked  each  other  with  such  fury,  that  the 
battle  continued  from  midnight  to  noon  of  the  next  day.  The 
Persians  at  length  gave  way,  and  fled  with  all  the  speed  they 
could  use,  their  commanders  being  the  first  who  began  to  fly. 
These  were  Pigraxes,  a  person  of  the  highest  birth  and  rank  next 
to  the  king,  Anareus,  and  Surenas.  The  Romans  and  Goths 
pursued  them,  and  killed  a  great  number,  from  whom  they  took 
a  vast  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  besides  ornaments  of  all  kind* 
for  men  and  horses,  with  silver  beds  and  tables,  and  whatever 
was  left  by  the  officers  on  the  ramparts.  It  is  computed,  that  in 
this  battle  there  fell  of  the  Persians  two  thousand  five  hundred, 
and  of  the  Romans  not  more  than  seventy-five.  The  joy  of  the 
army  for  this  victory  was  lessened  by  Victor  having  received  a 
wound  from  an  engine. 

Upon  the  following  day  the  emperor  sent  his  army  over  the 
Tigris  without  difficulty,  and  the  third  day  after  the  action  he 
himself  with  his  guards  followed  them.  Arriving  at  a  place  by 
the  Persians  termed  Abuzatha,  he  halted  there  five  days.  Mean- 
while he  consulted  about  his  journey  forward,  and  found  that  it 
was  better  to  march  further  into  the  country  than  to  lead  his  army- 
by  the  side  of  the  river;  there  being  now  no  necessity  to  proceed 
by  water.  Having  considered  this,  he  imparted  it  to  his  army, 
whom  he  commanded  to  burn  the  ships,  which  accordingly  were 
all  consumed,  except  eighteen  Roman  and  four  Persian  vessels, 
which  were  carried  along  in  waggons,  to  be  used  upon  occasion, 
Their  route  now  lying  a  little  above  the  river,  when  they  arrived 
at  a  place  called  Noorda  they  halted,  and  there  killed  and  took 


UOOK  in.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  87 

a  great  number  of  Persians.  ^  Advancing  thence  to  the  river  Du- 
rus,  they  constructed  a  bridge  over  it  for  their  passage.  The 
Persians  had  burnt  up  all  the  forage  of  the  country,  so  that  the 
cattle  of  the  Romans  were  ready  to  perish  with  hunger.  They 
were  collected  into  several  parties  awaiting  the  Romans,  whom 
they  imagined  to  be  but  a  small  number,  and  presently  afterward 
uniting  into  one  body  they  proceeded  towards  the  river.  Here, 
while  the  advanced  guard  engaged  with  a  party  of  Persians,  an 
enterprizing  man,  named  Macanaeus,  entered  among  them  and 
killed  four  of  them.  For  that  bold  action  they  all  fell  upon  him 
and  struck  him  down.  His  brother,  Maurus,  upon  seeing  this, 
attempted  to  rescue  at  least  his  dead  body  from  the  Persians,  and 
killed  the  man  who  had  given  him  the  first  wound ;  nor  did 
he  desist,  though  frequently  shot  at,  until  he  had  brought  off' 
his  brother  and  delivered  him  to  the  army  still  alive. 

Afterwards,  arriving  at  the  city  of  Barroptha,  they  found  the 
forage  as  before  burnt  up  by  the  Barbarians.  Perceiving  a  party 
of  Persians  and  Saracens,  who  dared  not  even  look  at  the  Roman 
army,  but  immediately  fled,  the  Romans  were  unable  to  judge 
their  design,  until  the  Persians,  by  collecting  together  into  a  con- 
siderable body,  shewed  that  they  had  a  design  upon  the  beasts  of 
burden.  Upon  which  the  emperor,  who  immediately  armed 
himself,  proceeded  with  greater  expedition  against  them  than  the 
rest  of  the  army.  The  Persians,  unable  to  sustain  the  force  of 
his  charge,  fled  to  places  with  which  they  were  well  acquainted. 
The  emperor  then  continued  his  march  to  Symbra,  which  lies  be- 
tween two  towns  named  Nisbara  and  Nischanaba,  which  are  se- 
parated from  each  other  by  the  Tigris.  The  inhabitants  have 
frequent  and  easy  intercourse  by  a  bridge  over  that  river.  The 
Persians  burned  the  bridge  to  prevent  the  Romans  from  availing 
themselves  of  it  to  injure  both  places.  Here  the  advanced  party, 
who  preceded  the  rest  to  collect  forage,  attacked  and  immedi- 
ately defeated  a  body  of  Persians,  while  the  army  finding  abund- 
ance of  provsions  in  the  town,  took  what  they  had  occasion  for 
and  destroyed  the  remainder. 

From  thence  they  proceeded  to  a  place  between  the  cities  of 
Danabe  and  Synca,  where  the  Persians  attacked  the  rear  of  the 
army  and  killed  a  great  number.  Their  own  loss,  however,  greatly 
exceeding  that  of  the  Romans,  and  having  the  disadvantage  from 
many  causes,  they  fled.  In  this  engagement,  Daces,  a  great  Sa- 
trap, was  killed.  He  had  formerly  been  sent  on  an  embassy  to 
the  emperor  Constantius  with  proposals  of  peace.  The  enemy, 
ypon  seeing  that  the  Romans  approached  a  town  called  Acceta, 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  in. 


burnt  all  the  produce  of  the  country  ;  but  the  Romans  hastened, 
and  extinguishing  the  fire,  took  what  they  could  save  for  their 
own  use. 

In  their  march  from  this  place  they  came  to  a  town  called  Ma- 
ronsa,  where  the  Persians  again  attacked  the  rear-guard,  and 
killed  amongst  others  Bretannio,  the  captain  of  a  troop,  and  a 
brave  soldier.  They  also  took  several  ships,  which  fell  into  their 
power  by  being  considerably  behind  the  army.  The  Romans 
from  Ihence  passed  hastily  along  by  some  villages,  and  arrived  at 
a  place  called  Tummara.  Here  they  repented  the  burning  of 
their  ships  ;  for  the  cattle  were  so  exhausted  with  the  fatigue  of 
travelling  in  an  enemy's  country,  that  they  were  not  able  to  carry 
all  the  necessaries  ;  and  the  Persians  collected  all  the  provender 
they  could,  and  stored  it  in  their  strongest  fortresses  that  it  might 
not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Romans.  When  they  were  thus 
situated  they  perceived  the  Persian  army,  with  which  they  en- 
gaged, and  having  considerably  the  advantage,  they  killed  a  great 
number  of  Persians.  Upon  the  following  day,  about  noon,  the 
Persians  drew  up  in  a  large  body,  and  once  more  attacked  the  rear 
of  the  Roman  army.  The  Romans,  being  at  that  time  out  of  their 
ranks,  were  surprised  and  alarmed  at  the  suddenness  of  the  attack, 
yet  made  a  stout  and  spirited  defence.  The  emperor,  according 
to  his  custom,  went  round  the  army,  encouraging  them  to  fight 
with  ardour.  When  by  this  means  all  were  engaged,  the  empe- 
ror, who  sometimes  rode  to  the  commanders  and  tribunes,  and 
was  at  other  times  among  the  private  soldiers,  received  a  wound 
in  the  heat  of  the  engagement,  and  was  borne  on  a  shield  to  his 
tent.  He  survived  only  till  midnight.  He  then  expired,  after 
having  nearly  subverted  the  Persian  empire. 

While  the  death  of  the  emperor  remained  secret,  the  Roman 
army  had  so  decidedly  the  advantage,  that  fifty  Satraps  and  an 
immense  number  of  private  persons  were  slain.  When  the  death 
of  the  emperor  was  discovered,  and  the  soldiers  returned  to  the 
tent  where  his  body  lay,  a  few  of  the  Romans,  indeed,  continued 
to  fight,  and  overcame  their  enemies  :  while  some  troops  sallying 
from  a  Persian  garrison  engaged  with  those  under  the  command 
of  Hormisdas.  After  a  smart  action  Antonius  fell,  who  was  cap- 
tajn  of  the  court-guards.  At  the  same  time,  Sallustius,  prefect 
of  the  court,  fell  from-  his  horse,  and  was  in  danger  of  being  killed 
by  the  enemy,  when  one  of  his  servants  dismounted  and  enabled 
him  to  escape.  With  him  the  two  legions  that  were  with  the 
emperor,  called  Scutarii,  likewise  gave  way.  Only  sixty  men, 
regarding  their  own  and  their  country's  honour,  had  the  courage 


in.  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


to  expose  themselves  to  death,  until  they  took  the  castle,  from 
which  the  Persians  had  sallied  who  had  thus  defeated  the  Ro- 
mans. Although  these  were  besieged  by  the  enemy  for  three 
days,  yet  they  were  preserved  by  a  party  that  attacked  the  be- 
siegers. A  meeting  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  was  afterwards 
convened,  in  order  to  appoint  a  successor  to  the  empire  :  since  it 
would  be  impossible  for  them  without  a  ruler  to  avoid  the  dan- 
gers to  which  they  were  exposed  in  the  midst  of  an  enemy's 
country.  The  general  voice  was  in  favour  of  Jovianus,  the  son 
of  Varronianus,  tribune  of  the  domestic  forces. 

When  Jovian  had  assumed  the  purple  and  the  diadem,  he  di- 
rected his  course  homewards  with  all  possible  speed.  Arriving 
at  the  castle  of  Suma,  he  was  attacked  by  the  Persian  cavalry, 
accompanied  by  a  great  number  of  elephants,  which  committed 
great  devastation  in  the  right  wing  of  the  army,  in  which  were 
placed  the  Joviani  and  Herculiani.  These  were  the  appellations 
of  two  legions,  so  named  from  Dioclesian  and  Maximian,  the1 
former  of  whom  assumed  the  surname  of  Jove,  and  the  latter  that 
of  Hercules.  Although  at  first  they  were  unable  to  sustain  the 
shock  Of  the  elephants,  yet  when  the  Persians  with  their  horses 
and  elephants  in  one  body  approached  them,  and  happened  to  ar- 
rive at  a  rising  ground,  on  which  were  the  carriages  of  the  Ro- 
mans and  those  who  had  the  care  of  them,  they  availed  them- 
selves of  the  advantage  to  throw  darts  from  above  upon  the  Per- 
sians, with  which  they  wounded  the  elephants.  Upon  feeling 
the  smart  of  their  wounds,  the  elephants,  in  their  usual  manner, 
immediately  fled,  breaking  the  line  of  the  cavalry.  The  soldiers 
were  thus  enabled  to  kill  the  elephants  in  their  llight,  and  num- 
bers of  the  enemy.  There  fell  also  on  the  Roman  side,  three  tri- 
bunes, Julianus,  Maximianus,  and  Macrobius. 

They  then  marched  forward  four  days,  continually  harassed  by 
the  enemy,  who  followed  them  when  they  were  proceeding,  but 
fled  when  the  Romans  offered  any  resistance.  At  length,  having 
gained  some  distance  of  the  enemy,  they  resolved  to  cross  the 
Tigris;  For  this  purpose  they  fastened  skins  together,  and  floated 
over.  When  the  greater  part  had  gained  the  opposite  bank,  the 
commanders  crossed  over  in  safety  with  the  remainder.  The 
Persians,  however,  still  accompanied  them,  and  followed  them 
with  a  large  army  so  assiduously,  that  the  Romans  were  in  per- 
petual danger,  both  from  the  unfavourable  circumstances  in  which 
they  were  placed^  and  from  the  want  of  provisions.  Although  the 
Roman  army  was  in  this  condition,  the  Persians  were  willing  to 
treat  for  peace,  and  for  that  purpose  sent  Surenas  with  other  oift- 

VOL,    1.    NO.    3.  M 


THE  HISTORY  «OOK  iff, 


cers  to  the  Roman  camp.  Jovian,  upon  hearing  this,  sent  to 
them  Sallustius,  prefect  of  the  court,  together  with  Aristaeus, 
who,  after  some  discussion,  agreed  on  a  truce  for  thirty  years. 
The  conditions  were,  that  the  Romans  should  give  up  to  the  Per- 
sians the  country  of  the  Rabdiceni,  and  that  of  the  Candueni, 
Rhemeni,  and  Zaleni,  besides  fifteen  castles  in  those  provinces, 
with  the  inhabitants,  lands,  cattle,  and  all  their  property  ;  that 
Nisibis  should  be  surrendered  without  its  inhabitants,  who  were 
to  be  transplanted  into  whatever  colony  the  Romans  pleased. 
The  Persians  also  deprived  the  Romans  of  great  part  of  Armenia, 
leaving  them  but  a  very  small  part  of  it.  The  truce  having 
been  concluded  on  these  conditions,  and  ratified  on  both  sides, 
the  Romans  had  an  opportunity  of  returning  home  unmolested, 
neither  party  offering  or  sustaining  any  injury,  either  by  open 
force  or  secret  machination. 

Having  arrived  at  this  part  of  my  history,  I  shall  recur  to 
former  ages,  and  enquire  whether  the  Romans  ever  before  gave  up 
any  of  their  dominions  to  other  nations,  or  ever  suffered  any 
other  to  possess  what  they  had  once  conquered.  Lucullus  having 
defeated  Tigranes  and  Mithridates,  and  added  to  the  Roman  em- 
pire the  whole  country  as  far  as  the  centre  of  Armenia,  and 
Nisibis  with  the  adjacent  fortresses  ;  Pompey  the  Great,  to  crown 
all  his  great  exploits,  by  a  peace  which  he  effected,  established 
and  confirmed  the  possession  of  them  to  the  Romans.  Upon 
a  former  war  in  Persia,  the  senate  appointed  Crassus  their  ge- 
neral and  plenipotentiary,  whose  ill  conduct  brought  a  lasting 
disgrace  on  the  Roman  name,  he  being  made  prisoner  and  dying 
among  the  Parthians.  The  command  was  then  vested  in  Antony. 
Being  enamoured  of  Cleopatra  he  became  indolent  and  regard- 
less of  military  affairs,  and  perished,  charged  with  actions  un- 
worthy of  a  Roman.  Notwithstanding  the  Romans  suffered  all 
these  disasters,  they  did  not  lose  even  one  of  those  provinces. 
When  the  republic  was  changed  into  a  monarchy,  and  Augustus 
constituted  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  the  boundary  of  the  Roman 
empire,  even  that  circumstance  did  not  deprive  them  of  this 
country.  On  the  contrary,  a  considerable  time  afterwards,  when 
the  emperor  Gordianus  fought  against  the  Persians,  and  lost  his 
life  in  the  midst  of  the  enemy's  country,  the  Persians,  even  after 
that  disaster,  were  not  able  to  acquire  any  part  of  the  Roman  do- 
minion. Nor  did  they  succeed  more  even  when  Philip  was  emperor, 
though  he  entered  into  a  most  dishonourable  peace  with  them. 
A  short  time  afterwards,  when  the  Persian  fire  had  set  all  the  east 
in  flames,  and  the  great  city  of  Antioch  was  taken  by  the  Persian 


HOOK  in.  OF  ZOS1MUS  91 

army  which  advanced  as  far  as  Cilicia,  the  emperor  Valerianus 
made  an  expedition  against  them,  and  though  he  was  taken  by 
them,  yet  still  they  did  not  dare  to  claim  the  sovereignty  of  those 
countries.  The  death  of  the  emperor  Julian  alone  was  a  suffi- 
cient cause  to  deprive  us  of  them  all,  and  that  in  so  irrevocable 
a  manner,  that  the  Roman  emperors  have  never  since  been  able 
to  recover  any  part  of  them,  but  have  gradually  lost  still  more ; 
some  having  made  themselves  perfectly  independent,  others  hav- 
ing surrendered  themselves  to  the  Barbarians,  and  others  becom- 
ing deserted  :  all  which  I  shall  in  the  course  of  this  history  relate 
as  it  occurred. 

To  return  from  my  digression.  When  peace  was  made  with 
the  Persians  in  the  manner  I  have  related,  the  emperor  Jovian  and 
his  army  were  returning  home  securely,  but  met  with  irwny 
difficulties,  through  the  badness  of  the  roads,  and  the  want  of 
water,  besides  the  loss  of  many  men  in  the  enemy's  country 
through  which  he  passed.  He  therefore  sent  Mauricius,  a  tribune, 
to  fetch  from  Nisibis  provisions  for  his  army.  He  also  sent 
others  to  Italy,  with  intelligence  of  the  death  of  Julian,  and  of 
himself  being  created  emperor.  Having  arrived  after  many  diffi- 
culties near  Nisibis,  he  would  not  enter  the  city,  because  it  was 
surrendered  to  the  enemy,  but  remained  all  night  before  the  gate, 
and  the  next  morning  received  the  crowns  and  compliments  that 
were  presented  to  him.  The  inhabitants  intreated  him  not  to 
forsake  them,  and  compel  them  to  degenerate  into  barbarism, 
after  having  lived  so  many  ages  under  the  Roman  laws.  They 
likewise  suggested  to  him  that  it  was  dishonourable  to  him,  that 
while  Constantius,  who  had  been  engaged  in  three  Persian  wars, 
and  was  defeated  in  all,  had  notwithstanding  always  protected 
Nisibis,  and  even  when  it  was  besieged  and  in  extreme  danger, 
had  exerted  all  his  power  to  preserve  it,  yet  that  he,  when  no 
such  necessity  existed,  should  yield  that  city  to  the  enemy,  and 
exhibit  to  the  Romans  an  occurrence  which  they  had  never  be- 
fore witnessed,  being  compelled  to  suffer  such  a  city,  and  such  a 
province,  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy.  The  emperor  on 
hearing  this  excused  himself  from  complying  with  their  desires  by 
stating  to  them  the  articles  of  the  treaty.  Then  Sabinus,  who 
was  the  chief  of  their  council,  repeated  what  the  people  had 
before  said  in  their  petition,  adding,  that  to  carry  on  a  war  against 
Persia  they  were  not  in  need  of  money  or  of  any  foreign  aid, 
but  were  able  with  their  own  bodies  and  their  own  purses  to 
defend  themselves ;  assuring  him  at  the  same  time,  that  when- 
ever they  should  prove  victorious  and  recover  their  liberty,  they 


92  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  in, 

would  again  become  subject  to  the  Romans,  and  obey  their  com*, 
mands  as  before.  To  which  the  emperor  replied,  that  he  could 
not  infringe  his  covenant.  The  citizens  then  urged  him  a  thou^ 
sand  times  not  to  deprive  the  empire  of  such  a  bulwark.  But 
their  entreaties  were  in  vain,  and  the  emperor  departed  in  anger ; 
while  the  Persians  demanded  possession  of  the  provinces,  the 
castles,  and  the  city,  according  to  the  conditions  of  the  treaty. 
Upon  this  the  inhabitants  of  some  provinces  and  castles,  who  had 
no  opportunity  of  escaping,  suffered  the  Persians  to  treat  them 
as  they  pleased  ;  but  the  Nisrbines,  having  gained  some  time  to 
prepare  for  their  removal,  the  greater  part  of  them  retired  to 
Amida,  and  a  few  fixed  their  abode  in  other  towns.  All  places 
•were  filled  with  lamentation  and  discontent,  finding  themselves 
exposed  to  the  incursions  of  the  Persians,  now  that  Nisibis  was  in 
their  power.  The  Carreni,  among  others,  were  so  grieved  at 
hearing  the  death  of  Julian,  that  they  stoned  to  death  the  person 
who  brought  the  news,  and  threw  a  heap  of  stones  on  his  body. 
So  great  a  change  in  affairs  was  the  death  of  one  man  then  ca- 
pable of  producing. 

Jovian  marched  through  all  the  towns  in  great  speed,  because 
they  were  so  filled  with  grief,  that  the  inhabitants  could  not  look 
patiently  on  him  ;  such  being  the  custom  and  disposition  of  those 
countries.  Taking  with  him  the  imperial  guard,  he  proceeded  to 
Antioch  ;  whilst  the  main  army  attended  on  Julian's  body,  which 
was  carried  into  Cilicia,  and  interred  in  a  royal  sepulchre  in  the 
suburbs  of  Tarsus.  Upon  his  tomb  are  inscribed  these  verses: 

"  Here  rests  in  peace,  retir'd  from  Tigris  wave, 
"  Julian  the  wise,  the  virtuous,  and  the  brave." 

Jovian  now  turning  his  attention  to  the  affairs  of  government, 
made  various  arrangements,  and  sent  Lucilianus  his  father-in-law, 
Procopius,  and  Valentinian,  who  was  afterwards  emperor,  to  the 
armies  in  Pannonia,  to  inform  them  of  the  death  of  Julian,  and  of 
his  being  chosen  emperor.  The  Bavarians  who  were  at  Sirmium, 
and  were  left  there  for  its  protection,  as  soon  as  they  received  the 
news,  put  to  death  Lucilianus  who  brought  such  unwelcome  intel- 
ligence, without  regard  to  his  relationship  to  the  emperor.  Such 
was  the  respect  they  had  to  Jovian's  relations,  that  Valentinian 
himself  only  escaped  from  the  death  they  intended  to  inflict  on 
him.  Jovianus  proceeding  from  Antioch  towards  Constantinople, 
suddenly  fell  sick  at  Dadostana  in  Bithynia,  and  died  after  a  reign 
of  eight  months,  in  which  short  time  he  had  not  been  able  to 
render  the  public  any  essential  service.  After  his  decease  a  con- 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


sultation  was  proposed  for  the  appointment  of  a  successor.  Several 
discussions  were  held  among  the  soldiers  and  their  officers,  and 
various  persons  were  nominated.  At  length  Sallustius,  the  prefect 
of  the  court,  was  unanimously  elected.  He  excused  himself  on 
the  pretext  of  his  advanced  age,  which  disabled  him  from  being  of 
service  in  the  present  critical  circumstances.  They  then  desired 
that  his  son  might  be  emperor  in  lieu  of  himself.  But  his  son  he 
told  them  was  too  young,  and  from  that  as  well  as  other  causes 
unable  to  sustain  the  weight  of  an  imperial  diadem.  They  thus 
failed  in  their  wish  to  appoint  so  distinguished  a  person,  who  was 
the  most  worthy  of  the  age.  They  therefore  elected  Valentinian, 
a  native  of  Cibalis  in  Pannonia.  He  was  an  excellent  soldier,  but 
extremely  illiterate.  They  sent  for  him,  he  being  then  at  some 
distance:  and  the  state  was  not  long  without  a  ruler.  Upon  his 
arrival  at  the  army,  at  Nicaea  in  Bithynia,  he  assumed  the 
rial  authority,  and  proceeded  forward. 


FOURTH  BOOK. 

IN  the  preceding  book  I  have  related  how  affairs  were  con- 
ducted until  the  death  of  Jovian,  after  whom  Valentinian  was 
appointed  emperor.  I  have  now  to  state,  that  while  Vaientiniau 
was  on  his  journey  towards  Constantinople,  he  was  seized  with  a 
distemper,  which  increased  his  natural  choleric  temper  to  a  de- 
gree  of  cruelty,  and  even  to  madness,  so  that  he  falsely  suspected 
his  sickness  to  proceed  from  some  charm  or  poison  which  Julian's 
friends  had  prepared  for  him  through  malice.  Accusations  to 
that  effect  were  drawn  up  against  some  distinguished  persons, 
which  were  set  aside  by  the  discretion  of  Sallustius,  who  still  was 
prefect  of  the  court.  After  his  distemper  abated,  he  proceeded 
from  Nicaea  to. Constantinople.  The  army  and  his  friends  in  that 
city  advised  him  to  chuse  an  associate  in  the  empire,  that  if  oc- 
casion should  require,  he  might  have  some  one  to  assist  him,  and 
prevent  their  again  suffering  as  at  the  death  of  Julian.  He  com- 
plied with  their  advice,  and  after  consideration,  selected  his  bro- 
ther Valens,  whom  he  thought  most  likely  to  prove  faithful  to 
him.  He  declared  him  associate  in  the  empire.  While  they  re- 
sided atConstantinople,  all  who, were  enemies  to  the  friends  of 
Julian  continually  suggested  at  court,  that  certain  persons  had  a 
design  against  the  emperors,  and  incited  the  populace  likewise  to 
spread  the  rumour.  Upon  this  the  emperors,  who  had  other  rea-, 
fonsfor  animosity  against  the  friends  of  Julian,  were  excited  to  a 


94  TflE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 

greater  degree  of  hatred,  and  therefore  encouraged  such  charges 
against  them  as  contained  no  appearance  of  reason.  Valentmian 
•was  particularly  severe  against  the  philosopher  Maximinus,  who 
in  Julian's  time  had  caused  him  to  be  punished  for  the  neglect 
of  sacred  things,  on  the  ground  of  Christianity.  But  other 
affairs  both  civil  and  military  drew  off  their  attention  from 
these  suspicions. 

They  then  applied  themselves  to  the  appointment  of  governors 
over  the  different  provinces,  and  consulted  who  should  have  the 
charge  of  the  palace.  By  which  means,  all  who  had  been  gover- 
nors of  the  provinces,  or  had  held  any  other  office  under  Julian, 
were  discharged,  and  amongst  them  Sallustius,  prefect  of  the 
court.  Arintheus  and  Victor  alone  retained  their  military  com- 
mands, while  others  who  sought  for  preferments,  acquired  them 
at  hazard.  The  only  reasonable  action  they  performed  was  this  ; 
if  any  of  the  officers  were  found  guilty  of  the  crimes  laid  to  their 
charge,  they  suffered  without  hope  of  pardon. 

Affairs  being  thus  disposed,  Valentinian  deemed  it  most  pru- 
dent to  place  the  east  as  far  as  Egypt,  Bithynia,  and  Thrace, 
under  the  care  of  his  brother,  and  to  take  charge  of  Illyricum 
himself.  From  thence  he  designed  to  proceed  to  Italy,  and  to 
retain  in  his  own  possession  all  the  cities  in  that  country,  and  the 
countries  beyond  the  Alps,  with  Spain,  Britain,  and  Africa.  The 
empire  being  thus  divided,  Valentinian  began  to  govern  more 
rigorously,  correcting  the  faults  of  the  magistrates.  He  was 
very  severe  in  the  collection  of  the  imposts,  and  particularly  in 
observing  that  the  soldiers  were  duly  paid.  Resolving  likewise  to 
institute  some  new  laws,  he  began  by  prohibiting  the  nocturnal 
sacrifices,  intending  by  that  measure  to  restrain  and  prevent 
ricious  actions.  However  when  Praetextatus,  the  proconsul  of 
Greece,  a  person  endowed  with  great  virtues,  represented  to  him 
that  the  Greeks  could  not  subsist  under  such  a  law,  by  which 
they  were  withheld  from  the  performance  of  those  sacred  myste^ 
ries,  which  were  to  them  the  great  bond  of  society,  he  allowed 
them  to  be  celebrated  in  the  usual  manner,  without  regard  to  his 
own  edict,  and  took  care  that  every  thing  should  be  performed 
according  to  the  ancient  custom  of  the  country. 

Meantime  the  Barbarians  beyond  the  Rhine,  who  while  Julian 
lived  held  the  Roman  name  in  terror,  and  were  contented  to  re- 
main quiet  in  their  own  territories,  as  soon  as  they  heard  of  his 
death,  immediately  marched  out  of  their  own  country,  and  pre* 
pared  for  a  war  with  the  Romans.  Valentinian,  on  being  informed 
•f  this,  made  a  proper  disposition  of  his  forces,  and  placed  suitable 


BOOK  iv.  OF    ZOSIMUS.  95 

garrisons  in  all  the  towns  along  the  Rhine.  Valentinian  was 
enabled  to  make  these  arrangements  by  his  experience  in  military 
affairs  ;  while  Valens  was  surrounded  with  disquietude  on  every 
side,  having  always  lived  inactively,  and  having  been  raised  to  the 
empire  suddenly.  He  could  not  indeed  sustain  the  weight  of  busi- 
ness. He  was  disturbed,  not  by  the  Persians  only,  who  were  elated 
with  their  prosperity,  which  had  increased  since  their  truce  with. 
Jovian.  They  made  incursions  on  the  provinces  without  controul, 
since  Nisibis  was  in  their  possession,  and  by  distressing  the 
eastern  towns,  constrained  the  emperor  to  march  against  them. 

On  his  departure  from  Constantinople,  the  rebellion  of  Procopius 
commenced.  This  person  had  been  intrusted  by  Julian,  being  one 
of  his  relations,  with  a  part  of  his  forces,  and  had  been  charged  to 
march  with  Sebastianus  through  Adiabene,  and  to  meet  Julian 
who  took  another  route.  Permission,  moreover,  was  given  him 
to  wear  a  purple  robe,  for  a  reason  which  no  other  person  was  ac- 
quainted with.  But  the  deity  being  pleased  to  ordain  it  other- 
wise, and  Jovian  having  succeeded  to  the  imperial  dignity,  Proco- 
pius immediately  delivered  up  the  imperial  robe  which  he  had  re- 
ceived from  Jovian,  confessing  why  it  had  been  given  to  him,  and 
intreating  the  emperor  to  absolve  him  from  his  military  oath,  and 
to  allow  him  to  live  in  retirement,  and  to  attend  to  agriculture 
and 'his  own  private  affairs.  Having  obtained  this,  he  went  with 
his  wife  and  children  to  Caesarea  in  Cappadocia,  intending  to 
reside  in  that  place,  where  he  possessed  a  valuable  estate.  During 
his  abode  there,  Valentiniau  and  Valens  being  made  emperors, 
and  being  suspicious  of  him,  sent  persons  to  take  him  into  cus- 
tody. In  that  they  found  no  difficulty,  for  he  surrendered  him- 
self voluntarily ;  and  desired  them  to  carry  him  wherever  they 
pleased,  if  they  would  suffer  him  first  to  see  his  children.  To 
this  they  consented,  and  he  prepared  an  entertainment  for  them. 
When  he  perceived  them  to  be  intoxicated,  he  and  his  family 
fled  towards  the  Taurica  Chersonesus.  Having  remained  there 
for  some  time,  he  found  the  inhabitants  to  be  a  faithless  race,  and 
was  apprehensive  lest  they  should  deliver  him  to  his  persecutors. 
He,  therefore,  put  himself  and  his  family  on  board  a  trading  vessel, 
and  arrived  in  the  night  at  Constantinople.  He  there  resided  in 
the  house  of  an  old  acquaintance,  and  making  observations  on 
the  state  of  the  city  after  the  departure  of  the  emperor,  he  at- 
tempted to  raise  himself  to  the  empire,  and  formed  his  design  on 
the  following  incident. 

An  eunuch,  named  Eugenius,  had  not  long  before  been  dis- 
charged from  the  court,  who  entertained  but  little  friendship  for 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  it,- 


the  emperors.  Procopius  therefore  won  this  man  to  his  interest,- 
because  he  found  him  to  be  very  rich.  He  informed  him  who  he 
was,  the  cause  of  his  arriving  there,  and  the  measures  which  he 
wished  to  pursue.  On  this,  the  eunuch  promised  to  assist  him 
in  any  enterprize,  and  to  furnish  him  with  money.  Their  first 
attempt  was  to  bribe  the  court  guards,  which  consisted  of  two1 
legions.  Then  arming  the  slaves,  and  collecting  with  ease  a 
considerable  multitude,  chiefly  volunteers;  they  sent  them  in  the 
night  into  the  city,  and  occasioned  a  general  commotion  ;  the 
people  issuing  from  their  houses,  and  gazing  on  Procopius  as  on  a 
king  made  in  a  theatre.  But  the  city  being  in  general  confusion, 
and  no  person  being  sufficiently  collected  in  mind  by  reason  of  the 
surprise  to  know  how  to  act,  Procopius  imagined  his  design  ta 
be  still  undiscovered,  and  that  he  might  secure  the  empire  if  the 
enterprize  were  no  further  revealed.  Having  then  seized  on 
Cesarius,  whom  the  emperors  had  made  prefect  of  the  city,  and 
oti  Nebridius,  who  was  appointed  to  succeed  Sallustius  in  the 
prefecture  of  the  court,  he  compelled  them  to  write  to  the  subjects 
of  the  empire  whatever  he  wished.  He  also  kept  them  separate, 
that  they  might  not  consult  with  each  other.  Having  formed 
these  projects,  he  proceeded  in  a  splendid  manner  towards  the 
palace.  Ascending  a  tribunal  before  the  gate,  he  gave  the  people 
great  hopes  and  promises.  He  then  entered  the  palace  to  pro- 
vide for  the  remainder  of  his  affairs. 

The  new  emperors  having  divided  the  army  between  them, 
Procopius  determined  to  send  persons  to  the  soldiers,  who  were 
as  yet  in  confusion,  and  went  by  the  command  of  the  empe- 
rors from  place  to  place  without  any  order.  He  thus  hoped  to  se- 
duce some  of  them  to  his  party.  Nor  did  he  fail  of  accomplish- 
ing his  purpose  with  ease  by  distributing  money  amongst  the 
soldiers  and  their  officers  ;  by  which  means  he  collected  a  con- 
siderable force,  and  prepared  to  make  an  open  attack  on  the 
enemy.  Procopius  then  sent  Marcellus  into  Brthynia  with  an 
army  against  Serenianus  and  the  imperial  Cavalry  that  was  under 
his  command,  in  hope  of  cutting  them  to  pieces.  This  force  hav- 
ing fled  toCyzicus,  Marcellus,  whose  army  was  superior  to  theirs* 
both  by  sea  and  land,  took  possession  of  that  town;  and  having 
taken  Serenianus,  who  fled  into  Lydia,  put  him  to  death.  Pro- 
copius was  so  elevated  by  this  fortunate  commencement,  that  his 
forces  considerably  augmented,  many  being  of  opinion  that  he  was 
able  to  contend  with  the  emperors.  Both  the  Roman  legions  and 
the  Barbarian  troops  now  flocked  to  his  standard.  Besides  the 
reputation  of  being  related  to  Julian,  and  of  having  accompanied 


»OOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMU&  97 

him  in  all  the  wars  he  had  ever  been  engaged  in,  attracted  many 
partizans.  He  likewise  sent  ambassadors  to  the  chief  of  Scythia1 
beyond  the  Ister,  who  sent  to  his  assistance  ten  thousand  men. 
The  other  Barbarian  nations  likewise  sent  auxiliaries  to  share  in 
the  expedition.  Procopius  however  considered  that  it  would  be 
imprudent  in  him  to  engage  with  both  emperors  together,  and 
therefore  thought  it  best  to  advance  against  him  who  was  nearest, 
and  afterwards  deliberate  on  what  course  to  pursue. 

Thus  was  Procopius  employed  ;  while  the  emperor  Valens, 
who  heard  of  this  insurrection  at  Galatia  in  Phrygia,  was  filled 
with  consternation  at  the  news.  Arbitrio  having  encouraged  him 
not  to  despair,  he  prepared  the  troops  that  were  with  him  for  war, 
and  sent  to  his  brother  to  inform  him  of  the  designs  of  Procopius. 
Valentinian  however  was  little  disposed  for  sending  auxiliaries 
to  one  who  was  incapable  of  defending  the  empire  committed  to 
his  charge.  Valens  was  therefore  under  the  necessity  of  prepar- 
ing for  war,  and  appointed  Arbitrio  to  the  command  of  his  army. 
When  the  armies  were  ready  to  engage,  Arbitrio  circumvented 
Procopius  by  a  stratagem,  and  thereby  seduced  from  him  a  great 
number  of  his  men,  from  whom  he  received  previous  informa- 
tion of  the  designs  of  Procopius.  On  the  advance  of  the  emperor 
and  Procopius  towards  each  other,  the  two  armies  met  near 
Thyatira.  Procopius  at  first  appeared  to  have  the  advantage,  by 
which  he  would  have  gained  the  supreme  authority,  Hormis- 
das  in  the  engagement  having  overpowered  the  enemy.  But 
Gomarius,  another  of  the  commanders  of  Procopius,  imparting 
his  intention  to  all  the  soldiers  of  Procopius  who  were  attached 
to  the  emperor,  in  the  midst  of  the  battle  cried  out  Augustus,  and 
gave  a  signal  for  them  to  imitate  his  example.  Thus  the  most  of 
the  troops  of  Procopius  went  over  to  Valens. 

After  having  obtained  this  victory,  Valens*marched  to  Sardes, 
and  from  thence  into  Phrygia,  where  he  found  Procopius  in  a 
town  called  Nacolia.  Affairs  having  been  ordered  for  the  ad- 
vantage of  the  emperor  by  Naplo,  an  officer  of  Procopius,  Valens 
again  prevailed,  and  took  him  prisoner,  and  soon  afterwards 
Marcellus,  both  of  whom  he  put  to  death*  Finding  in  the  pos- 
session of  Marcellus  an  imperial  robe  which  had  been  given  to 
him  by  Procopius,  he  was  so  enraged,  that  he  commenced  an 
inquiry  not  only  after  the  actors  in  the  revolt,  but  after  those- who 
had  given  any  counsel  in  it,  or  had  even  heard  any  circumstance 
which  they  had  not  revealed.  He  thus  acted  with  great  severity 
towards  all  persons,  without  regard  to  justice.  Not  only  all  who 
had  conspired,  but  who  were  merely  friends  or  relations  to  any 

VOL.  i.  NO.  2,  N 


08  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  m 

of  the  conspirators,  though  themselves  perfectly  innocent,  were 
sacrificed  to  the  fury  of  the  emperor. 

While  such  was  the  posture  of  affairs  in  that  part  of  the  empire 
which  was  attached,  ta  Valens,  the  emperor  Valentinian,  who 
resided  beyond  the  Alps,  was  attacked  by  a  great  and  unexpected 
danger.  The  Germans,  recollecting  their  sufferings  under  the 
administration  of  Julian,  as  soon  as  tbey  heard  of  his  death,  shook 
off  all  fear,  and  resuming  their  natural  audacity,  invaded  the  na- 
tions subject  to  the  Roman  empire.  Being  met  by  the  emperor, 
a  severe  battle  ensued,  in  which  the  Barbarians  were  victorious. 
The  Roman  army  dishonourably  fled.  Valentinian,  however, 
resolved  not  to  save  himself  by  flight;  be  therefore  bore  the 
event  of  the  battle  with  apparent  composure,  until  he  had  disco- 
vered those,  who  by  their  first  beginning  to  fly  had  caused  the 
disaster.  Having  at  length  by  strict  inquiry  ascertained  that  the 
Batavian  legion  was  guilty,  he  ordered  the  whole  army  to  assem- 
ble in  complete  martial  habilimentsz  as  if  to  hear  an  oration  far 
their  information  in  some  important  affair.  He  then  addressed 
them,  reflecting  the  strongest  ignominy  on  those  who  commenced 
the  fligbt,  and  commanded  the  Batavians  to  be  stripped  of  their 
arms,  and  to  be  sold  to  a  colony  as  fugitive  slaves.  Upon  this 
they  all  prostrated  themselves  on  the  ground,  and  intreated  him 
not  to  inflict  so  disgraceful  a  punishment  on  his  soldiers,  promis- 
ing in  future  to  behave  like  men  and  worthy  of  the  Roman  natne. 
He  complied  with  their  intreaties,  requiring  tbem  to  prove  by 
their  actions  the  sincerity  of  their  intention.  They  then  rose 
from  the  ground,  armed  themselves,  and  renewed  the  combat 
with  such  alacrity  and  resolution,  that  of  an  immense  number  of 
Barbarians  very  few  returned  to  their  own  country.  Thus  termi- 
nated the  war  with  the  Germans. 

After  the  death  of  Procopius,  the  emperor  Valens  sacrificed  to 
his  resentment  the  lives  of  many  persons,  and  confiscated  the  pro- 
perty of  many  others.  His  intended  expedition  into  Persia  was 
obstructed  by  the  incursions  into  the  Roman  territories  of  a  Scy- 
thian tribe  residing  beyond  the  Ister.  Against  these  he  directed 
a  competent  force,  arresting  their  progress,  and  compelling  them 
to  surrender  their  arms.  He  sent  them  to  several  of  his  towns  on 
the  Ister,  with  orders  for  them  to  be  kept  in  prison  without  chains. 
These  were  the  auxiliaries  that  were  sent  by  a  Scythian  chief  to 
Procopius.  Their  chief  therefore  demanding  their  dismissal  from, 
the  emperor,  on  the  ground  that  they  had  /been  sent  at  the  request 
of  ambassadors  from  the  person  who.  then  held  the  sovereign  au- 
thority, Valens  refused  to  listen  to  this  demand.  He  replied,  that 


BO  OK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  99 

they  had  neither  been  sent  for  nor  taken  by  him  as  friends,  but 
as  enemies.  This  produced  a  war  with  the  Scythians.  The  em- 
peror, perceiving  that  they  designed  to  invade  the  Roman  domi- 
nion, and  were  for  that  purpose  collecting  together  with  the  ut- 
most speed,  drew  up  his  army  on  the  bank  of  the  Ister.  He 
himself  was  stationed  at  Marcianopolis,  the  largest  city  of  Thrace, 
where  he  paid  great  attention  to  the  discipline  of  the  army,  and 
to  the  supplies  of  provisions.  He  then  appointed,  A  uxonius  pre- 
fect of  the  court,  Sallustius  having,  by  reason  of  his  age,  ob- 
tained permission  to  resign  that  office,  which  he  had  twice  held. 
Auxonius,  though  on  the  eve  of  so  dangerous  a  war,  acted  with 
the  strictest  justice  in  the  collection  of  the  tributes,  being  careful 
that  no  person  was  oppressed  with  exactions  more  than  it  was 
his  right  to  pay.  He  likewise  procured  many  transport-vessels, 
in  which  he  conveyed  provisions  for  the  army  through  the  Eux- 
ine  Sea  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ister,  and  thence,  that  the  army 
might  be  the  more  easily  supplied,  by  boats  to  the  several  towns 
on  the  side  of  the  river. 

These  transactions  having  taken  place  in  the  winter  season,  the 
emperor  marched  from  Marcianopolis  into  the  territory  of  the 
enemy,  with  the  troops  that  were  stationed  near  the  Ister,  and  aj> 
tacked  the  Barbarians.  Not  having  sufficient  resolution  to  come 
to  a  regular  engagement,  they  took  refuge  in  the  marshes,  from 
whence  they  occasionally  sallied.  The  emperor  therefore  ordered 
his  troops  to  continue  at  their  stations,  and  collected  all  the  slaves 
in  the  camp,  and  those  who  had  the  care  of  the  baggage,  pro- 
mising a  sum  of  money  to  every  man  who  brought  him  the  head 
of  a  Barbarian.  This  filled  them  with  hopes  of  gaining  the  mo- 
ney, inducing  them  to  go  into  the  woods  and  fens,  killing  all  they 
met,  whose  heads  they  brought  to  the  emperor,  and  received  the 
promised  reward.  By  these  means  so  many  were  destroyed  that 
the  rest  petitioned  for  a  truce.  The  emperor  acceded  to  their 
entreaty,  and  a  peace  was  concluded  with  them  which  reflected 
no  dishonour  on  the  Roman  name.  It  was  agreed,  that  the  Ro- 
mans should  enjoy  in  security  all  their  former  possessions,  and 
that  the  Barbarians  should  not  cross  the  river,  nor  enter  into  any 
part  of  the  Roman  dominions.  Having  concluded  this  treaty-, 
the  emperor  returned  to  Constantinople,  and  the  prefect  of  the 
court  being  dead,  conferred  that  office  on  Modestus^  He  then 
prepared  for  the  war  with  Persia. 

While  Valens  was  engaged  in  these  preparations,  the  emperor 
Valentinian,  having  favourably  disposed  the  affairs  of  Germany, 
made  provisions  for  the  future  security  of  the  Celtic  nations.  With 


100  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 

this  view  he  levied  among  the  Barbarians  near  the  Rhine  and  the 
husbandmen  in  the  countries  under  the  Roman  dominion  a  conside- 
rable number  of  young  men.  These  he  incorporated  with  the  le- 
gionary soldiers,  and  brought  to  so  good  a  state  of  discipline,  that 
from  the  sole  dread  of  their  military  skill,  during  the  period  of 
nine  years,  the  nations  beyond  the  Rhine  did  not  dare  to  make 
any  attempt  upon  any  of  the  cities  belonging  to  the  Romans. 
About  this  time,  a  person  named  Valentinian  for  some  offence 
was  banished  to  the  island  of  Britain,  and  endeavouring  there  to 
render  himself  absolute,  was  at  once  deprived  of  his  life  and  his 
hopes.  The  emperor  Valentinian  was  now  attacked  by  a  disease 
which  nearly  cost  him  his  life.  Upon  his  recovery  the  countries 
requested  him  to  appoint  a  successor,  lest  at  his  decease  the  com- 
monwealth should  be  in  danger.  To  this  the  emperor  consented, 
and  declared  his  son  Gratian  emperor  and  his  associate  in  the  go- 
vernment, although  he  was  then  very  young,  and  not  yet  capa- 
ble of  the  management  of  affairs. 

The  affairs  of  the  west  being  thus  situated,  the  emperor  Valens, 
as  he  had  previously  intended,  prepared  to  march  into  the  east 
against  the  Persians.  Proceeding  slowly  forward,  he  granted  every 
reasonable  favour  to  the  cities  that  sent  ambassadors  to  him,  and 
performed  various  other  good  actions.  Arriving  at  Antioch,  he 
made  every  provision  relative  to  the  war  with  great  caution. 
After  residing  in  the  palace  there  during  the  winter,  he  proceeded 
in  the  spring  to  Hierapolis.  He  led  his  forces  from  thence  against 
the  Persians,  and  when  winter  again  approached  he  returned  to 
Antioch.  Thus  was  the  war  with  the  Persians  protracted.  While 
the  emperor  remained  at  Antioch,  an  extraordinary  circumstance 
happened.  Among  the  imperial  notaries  was  one  named  Theo- 
dorus,  a  person  of  reputation,  birth,  and  education.  Being  very 
young  he  was  easily  seduced  to  vice  by  the  delusions  of  designing 
profligates.  A  society  of  persons  of  that  description  persuaded 
him  that  they  were  men  of  great  learning,  particularly  in  the 
science  of  divination,  by  which  they  were  able  to  foretel  future 
events.  In  order  to  ascertain  who  should  succeed  Valens  in  the 
empire,  they  fixed  up  a  tripod,  which  revealed  to  them  in  a 
secret  manner  what  should  happen  hereafter.  Now  in  this  tri- 
pod had  appeared  the  letters  6,  5,  0,  3,  (i.  e.  Theod.)  by  which 
was  predicted  in  plain  terras' that  Theodorus  should  succeed  ,Va- 
lens  in  the  empire.  He  was  so  involved  in  these  follies,  that  he 
was  continually  anxious  for  the  conversation  of  jugglers  and  sor^ 
cerers,  consulting  them  of  the  future.  He  was  therefore  ac- 
cused to  the  emperor,  who  punished  him  as  he  merited. 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  101 

After  this  happened  another  singular  occurrence.  Fortuuatia- 
nus,  the  treasurer  of  the  emperor,  had  ordered  stripes  to  be  in- 
flicted on  a  soldier  for  sorcery.  The  man  being  put  to  the  tor- 
ture, and  compelled  to  accuse  others  who  were  his  accomplices, 
the  cause  was  removed  before  Modestus,  the  prefect  of  the  court, 
because  some  persons  were  implicated  who  were  not  subject  to 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  former  otficer.  The  emperor  was  ex- 
tremely incensed,  and  suspected  all  the  most  celebrated  philoso- 
phers, and  other  persons  who  had  acquired  learning,  as  likewise 
some  of  the  most  distinguished  courtiers,  who  were  charged  with 
a  conspiracy  against  their  sovereign.  This  filled  every  place  with 
lamentation  ;  the  prisons  being  full  of  persons  who  did  not  merit 
such  treatment,  and  the  roads  being  more  crowded  than  the  cities. 
The  guards,  who  were  appointed  to  the  care  of  the  prisons,  in 
-which  these  innocent  persons  were  confined,  declared  themselves 
incapable  of  securing  those  who  were  under  their  charge,  and 
were  apprehensive  that  they  would  on  some  occasion  escape  by 
force,  the  number  being  so  great.  The  informers  in  this  affair 
were  subject  to  no  danger,  being  only  compelled  to  accuse  other 
persons.  All  that  they  accused  were  either  put  to  death  with- 
out legal  proof,  or  fined  by  being  deprived  of  their  estates;  their 
wives,  children,  and  other  dependants  being  reduced  to  extreme 
necessity.  The  design  of  these  nefarious  accusations  was  to  raise 
a  great  sum  of  money  for  the  treasury.  The  first  philosopher  of 
note  who  suffered  was Maximus,  the  next  was  Hilarius  of  Phrygia, 
•who  had  clearly  interpreted  some  obscure  oracles;  after  these, 
Simonides,  Patricius  the  Lydian,  and1  Andronicus  of  Caria,  who 
all  were  men  of  extensive  learning,  and  condemned  more  through 
envy  than  with  any  shadow  of  justice.  An  universal  confusion 
was  occasioned  by  these  proceedings,  which  prevailed  to  such  a 
degree,  that  the  informers,  together  with  the  rabble,  would  enter 
without  controul  into  the  house  of  any  person,  pillage  it  of  all 
they  could  find,  and  deliver  the  wretched  proprietor  to  those 
who  were  appointed  as  executioners  without  suffering  them  to 
plead  in  their  own  justification.  The  leader  of  these  wretches 
was  a  man  named  Festus,  whom  the  emperor,  knowing  his  ex- 
pertness  in  every  species  of  cruelty,  sent  into  Asia  as  proconsul, 
that  no  person  of  learning  might  remain  alive,  and  that  his  design 
might  be  accomplished.  Festus  therefore,  leaving  no  place  un- 
searched,  killed  all  whom  he  found  without  form  of  trial,  and 
compelled  the  remainder  to  fly  from  their  country. 

Valentinian,  thinking  he  had  sufficiently  secured  himself  from 
a  German  war,  acted  towards  his  subjects  with  great  severity, 


102     THE  HISTORY BOOK  iv. 

exacting  from  them  exorbitant  tributes,  such  as  they  had  never 
before  paid;  under  pretence  that  the  military  expenditure  com- 
pelled him  to  have  recourse  tothe  public.  Having  thus  acquired 
universal  hatred,  he  became  still  more  severe ;  nor  would  he  en- 
quire into  the  conduct  of  the  magistrates,  but  was  envious  of  all 
who  had  the  reputation  of  leading  a  blameless  life.  In  plain 
terms,  he  was  now  a  person  completely  different  from  what  he 
had  appeared  at  the  commencement  of  his  reig^n.  For  this  cause, 
the  Africans,  who  could  not  endure  the  excessive  avarice  of  the 
person  who  held  the  military  command  in  Mauritania,  gave  the 
purple  robe  to  Firmus,  and  proclaimed  him  emperor.  This  doubt* 
less  gave  much  uneasiness  to  Valentinian,  who  immediately  com' 
manded  some  legions  from  the  stations  in  Pannonia  and  Mcesia 
to  embark  for  Africa.  On  this  the  Sarmatians  and  the  Quadi, 
who  had  long  entertained  a  hatred  for  Celestius,  the  governor  of 
those  countries,  availing  themselves  of  the  opportunity  afforded 
by  the  departure  of  the  legions  for  Africa,  invaded  the  Panno- 
nians  and  Mossians.  Celestius  had  infringed  an  oath,  and  had 
not  only  treacherously  deceived,  but  had  murdered  their  chief  at 
a  banquet.  The  barbarians  therefore  revenged  themselves  by 
plundering  all  the  country  along  the  Ister,  carrying  off  all  that 
they  found  in  the  towns.  The  Pannonians  were  by  these  means 
exposed  to  the  cruelty  of  the  barbarians,  while  the  soldiers  were 
extremely  negligent  in  the  defence  of  their  towns,  and  committed 
as  much  mischief  as  the  Barbarians  themselves  in  all  places  on 
this  side  of  the  river.  But  Moesia  was  free  from  harm,  because 
Theodosius,  who  commanded  the  forces  there,  courageously  re* 
sisted  the  Barbarians,  and  routed  them  when  they  attacked  him, 
By  that  victory  he  not  only  acquired  great  renown,  but  subse- 
quently attained  the  imperial  dignity. 

Valentinian,  roused  by  the  intelligence  of  these  events,  marched 
from  Celtica  into  Illyricum,  for  the  purpose  of  opposing  the  Quadi 
and  the  Sarmatians,  and  consigned  the  command  of  his  forces  to 
Merobaudes,  who  was  a  person  of  the  greatest  military  experi- 
ence. The  winter  continuing  unusually  late,  the  Quadi  sent  am- 
bassadors to  him  with  insolent  and  unbecoming  messages.  These 
so  exasperated  the  emperor,  that  through  the  violence  of  his  rage, 
the  blood  flowed  from  his  head  into  his  mouth,  and  suffocated 
him.  He  thus  died  after  having  resided  in  Illyricum  nearly  nine 
months,  and  after  a  reign  of  twelve  years. 

After  his  decease,  Sirmium  was  struck  with  lightning,  which 
consumed  the  palace  and  the  market-place.  This  was  thought 
by  persons  versed  in  such  occurrences  to  be  an  omen  of  evil  to 


HOOK  iv.  OF  ZOS1MUS.  103 

public  affairs.  Earthquakes  likewise  happened  in  many  places. 
Crete  was  very  much  shaken,  as  was  likewise  the  Peloponnese, 
and  all  Greece,  many  places  being  destroyed  ;  indeed  almost  all 
we/e  overturned,  except  Athens  and  the  country 'of  Attica.  These 
were  said  to  be  preserved  by  these  means.  "^Nestori us,  who  was  then 
chief  sacrist  at  Athens,  saw  a  vision,  by  which  he  was  commanded 
to  pay  public  honours  to  the  hero  Achilles,  which  would  be  a 
protection  to  the  city.  Having  communicated  this  to  the  magis- 
trates, they  imputed  it  to  the  doting  of  age,  and  paid  no  attention 
to  his  communications.  Considering  therefore  within  himself,  and 
receiving  instructions  from  the  divine  influence,  he  erected  the 
image  of  the  hero  in  an  apartment  under  the  statue  of  Minerva. 
As  often  as  he  offered  sacrifices  to  the  goddess,  he  at  the  same 
time  performed  the  rites  due  to  the  hero.  Having  thus  complied 
with  the  desire  of  the  vision,  the  Athenians  were  free  from  the 
earthquake  by  which  every  other  place  suffered,  except  the 
country  of  Attica,  which  shared  in  the  favour  of  the  hero.  The 
truth  of  this  is  attested  by  the  philosopher  Syrianus,  who  has 
composed  a  hymn  in  honour  of  this  hero.  These  occurrences  I 
have  introduced  under  the  idea  that  they  were  not  foreign  from 
the  design  of  my  history. 

Valentinian  being  dead,  the  tribunes  Merobaudes  and  Equitius, 
reflecting  on.  the  distance  at  which  Valens  and  Gratian  resided, 
the  former  being  in  the  east,  and  the  latter  left  by  his  father  in 
the  western  part  of  Gaul,  were  apprehensive  lest  the  Barbarians 
beyond  the  Ister  should  make  an  effort  while  the  country  was 
without  a  ruler.  They  therefore  sent  for  the  younger  son  of 
Valentinian,  who  was  born  of  his  wife  the  widow  of  Magnentius, 
who  was  not  far  from  thence  with  the  child.  Having  clothed 
him  in  purple,  they  brought  him  into  the  court,  though  scarcely 
five  years  old.  The  empire  was  afterwards  divided  between  Gra- 
tian and  the  younger  Valentinian,  at  the  discretion  of  their  guar- 
dians, they  not  being  of  age  to  manage  their  own  affairs.  The 
Celtic  nations,  Spain,  and  Britain  were  given  to  Gratian  ;  and 
Italy,  Illyricum,  and  Africa  to  Valentinian.  Meantime  the  em- 
peror Valens  was  inundated  with  wars  on  every  side.  The  first 
of  these  was  with  the  Isaurians,  who  are  by  some  called  Pisidae, 
by  others  Solymi,  and  by  others  Cilices  Montani,  or  Mountain 
Cilicians.  They  pillaged  the  towns  of  Lycia  and  Pamphylia,  and 
though  they  could  not  obtain  possession  of  the  walls  and  houses, 
yet  carried  off  all  that  was  in  the  roads  and  fields.  The  emperor, 
who  still  remained  at  Antioch,  sent  a  force  sufficient  to  oppose 
them.  The  Tsuarians  then  fled  with  their  plunder  to  the  clefts  of 


104  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  rY, 

the  mountains,  to  which  the  soldiers  were  either  prevented  by 
indolence  from  pursuing  them,  or  from  some  cause  unable  to 
redress  the  evils  which  the  towns  had  suffered. 

While  these  affairs  were  so  conducted,  a  barbarous  nation, 
which  till  then  had  remained  unknown,  suddenly  made  its  ap- 
pearauce,  attacking  the  Scythians  beyond  the  Ister.  These  were 
the  Huns.  It  is  doubtful  whether  they  were  Scythians,  who  lived 
under  regal  government,  or  the  people  whom  Herodotus  states  to 
reside  near  the  Ister,  and  describes  as  a  weak  people  with  flat 
noses,  or  whether  they  came  into  Europe  from  Asia.  For  I  have 
met  with  a  tradition,  which  relates  that  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus 
was  rendered  firm  land  by  mud  brought  down  the  Tanais,  by  which 
they  were  originally  afforded  a  land-passage  from  Asia  into  Europe. 
However  this  might  be,  they,  with  their  wives,  children,  horses, 
and  carnages,  invaded  the  Scythians  who  resided  on  the  Ister ;  and 
though  they  were  not  capable  of  fighting  on  foot,  nor  understood 
in  what  manner  even  to  walk,  since  they  could  not  fix  their  feet  fi  rmly 
on  the  ground,  but  live  perpetually,  and  even  sleep,  on  horseback, 
yet  by  the  rapidity  with  which  they  wheeled  about  their  horses, 
by  the  suddenness  of  their  excursions  and  retreat,  shooting  as  they 
rode,  they  occasioned  great  slaughter  among  the  Scythians.  In 
this  they  were  so  incessant,  that  the  surviving  Scythians  were 
compelled  to  leave  their  habitations  to  these  Huns,  and  crossing 
the  Ister,  to  supplicate  the  emperor  to  receive  them,  on  their 
promise  to  adhere-to  him  as  faithful  soldiers.  The  officers  of  the 
fortified  towns  near  the  Ister  deferred  complying  with  this  peti- 
tion, until  they  should  learn  the  pleasure  of  the  emperor,  who 
permitted  them  to  be  received  without  their  arms.  The  tribunes 
and  other  officers  therefore  went  over  to  bring  the  Barbarians  un- 
armed into  the  Roman  territory ;  but  occupied  themselves  solely 
in  the  gratification  of  their  brutal  appetites,  or  in  procuring  slaves, 
neglecting  every  thing  that  related  to  public  affairs.  A  consider- 
able number  therefore  crossed  over  with  their  arms,  through  this 
negligence.  These,  on  arriving  into  the  Roman  dominion,  forgot 
both  their  petition  and  their  oaths.  Thus  all  Thrace,  Pannonia* 
and  the  whole  country  as  far  as  Macedori  and  Thessaly  were  filled 
with  Barbarians,  who  pillaged  all  in  their  way. 

Of  these  'extreme  dangers  the  emperor  was  informed  by  mes- 
sengers, who  were  purposely  sent  to  him.  Having  then  arranged 
his  affairs  in  Persia  in  the  best  possible  manner,  he  hastened  from 
Antioch  to  Constantinople  ;  and  from  thence  marched  into  Thrace 
against  the  fugitive  Scythians.  On  his  route  a  remarkable  spectacle 
presented  itself.  The  body  of  a  man  was  lying  in  the  road, 


BDOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  105 


perfectly  motionless,  which  appeared  as  if  it  had  been  whipped 
from  head  to  foot ;  the  eyes  were  open,  and  gazed  on  all  who  ap- 
proached it.  Having  enquired  of  him,  who  he  was,  and  from 
whence  he  came,  and  who  had  so  severely  beat  him,  and  receiving 
no  reply,  they  concluded  it  to  be  a  prodigy,  and  shewed  him  to 
the  emperor  as  he  passed  by.  Although  he  made  the  same  en- 
quiries, it  still  remained  speechless,  and  though  void  of  motion 
and  apparently  dead,  yet  the  eyes  appeared  as  if  alive.  At  length 
it  suddenly  disappeared.  The  spectators  were  unable  to  account 
for  the  prodigy;  but  persons  who  were  skilled  in  such  events, 
said  that  it  portended  the  future  state  of  the  empire;  that  the 
commonwealth  should  appear  as  if  it  had  been  beaten  and 
whipped,  until,  by  the  misconduct  of  its  magistrates  and  mi- 
nisters, it  would  expire.  If  we  take  all  circumstances  into  con- 
sideration, this  interpretation  will  indeed  appear  just. 
•  The  emperor  Valens,  perceiving  that  the  Scythians  were  pil- 
laging Thrace,  resolved  to  send  the  troops  who  had  accompanied 
him  from  the  east,  and  who  were  expert  horsemen,  to  make  the 
first  charge  on  the  Scythian  horse.  These  having  therefore  re- 
ceived orders  from  the  emperor,  left  Constantinople  in  small  de- 
tachments, and  killing  the  straggling  Scythians  with  their  spears, 
brought  many  of  their  heads  into  the  city  every  day.  As  the 
fleetness  of  their  horses,  and  the  force  of  their  spears,  caused  the 
Scythians  to  suppose  it  difficult  to  overcome  these  Saracens,  they 
attempted  to  circumvent  them  by  stratagem.  They  planted  in 
several  places  ambuscades  of  three  Scythians  to  one  Saracen ;  but 
their  design  was  rendered  abortive,  as  the  Saracens  by  means  of 
the  swiftness  of  their  horses  could  easily  escape  whenever  they 
perceived  any  considerable  number  approaching,  The  Saracens 
with  their  spears  committed  such  ravage  among  the  Scythians, 
that  at  length  despairing  of  success,  they  preferred  passing  the 
Ister  and  surrendering  themselves  to  the  Huns,  than  being  de- 
stroyed by  the  Saracens.  When  they  had  retired  from  all  the 
places  near  Constantinople,  the  emperor  had  room  to  draw  out  "1 
his  army.  He  was  now  hesitating  how  to  manage  the  war,  so 
great  a  multitude  of  Barbarians  being  at  hand,  and  was  tormented 
by  the  ill  conduct  of  his  own  officers.  He  was  notwithstanding 
afraid  of  discharging  them  under  such  turbulent  circumstances, 
and  was  likewise  doubtful  whom  to  appoint  in  their  place,  since 
no. one  appeared  who  was  capable  of  such  employments.  At  this 
juncture,  Sebastianus  arrived  at  Constantinople  from  the  west, 
although  the  emperors  there,  by  reason  of  their  youth,  were  un- 
acquainted with  affairs,  and  attended  to  little  beside  the  calumnies 
VOL.  1.  NO.  -2.  o 


100  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 

of  the  eunuchs  who  waited  on  them.  Upon  hearing  of  his  arrival, 
Valens,  knowing  his  ability  both  in  civil  and  military  affairs,  ap- 
pointed him  to  the  command  of  his  army,  and  entrusted  him  with 
the  whole  management  of  the  war.  Sebastianus,  observing  the 
indolence  and  effeminacy  both  of  the  tribunes  and  soldiers,  and 
that  all  they  had  been  taught  was  only  how  to  fly,  and  to  have  de- 
sires more  suitable  to  women  than  to  men,  requested  no  more 
than  two  thousand  men  of  his  own  choice.  He  well  knew  the  diffi- 
culty of  commanding  a  multitude  of  ill-disciplined  dissolute  men, 
and  that  a  small  number  might  more  easily  be  reclaimed  from 
their  effeminacy  ;  and,  moreover,  that  it  was  better  to  risk  a  few 
than  all.  By  these  arguments  having  prevailed  upon  the  empe- 
ror, he  obtained  his  desire.  He  selected,  not  such  as  had  been 
trained  to  cowardice  and  accustomed  to  flight,  but  strong  and  ac- 
tive men  who  had  lately  been  taken  into  the  army,  and  who  ap- 
peared to  him,  who  was  able  to  judge  of  men,  to  be  capable  of 
any  service.  He  immediately  made  trial  of  each  of  them,  and 
obviated  their  defects  by  continual  exercise;  bestowing  commen- 
dations and  rewards  on  all  who  were  obedient,  but  appearing  se- 
vere and  inexorable  to  those  who  neglected  their  duty.  Having* 
by  these  means  infused  into  them  the  principles  of  the  military 
art,  he  took  possession  of  several  fortified  towns,  for  the  security 
of  his  army.  From  these  he  frequently  surprised  the  Barbarians 
as  they  came  out  for  forage.  Sometimes,  when  they  were  loaded 
with  spoils,  he  killed  them  and  took  what  they  carried  ;  at  other 
times  he  destroyed  them  when  they  were  intoxicated  or  washing 
themselves  in  the  river. 

When  he  had  by  these  methods  cut  off  great  part  of  the  Bar- 
barians, and  the  remainder  felt  such  dread  of  him  that  they  dared 
not  attempt  to  forage,  an  extraordinary  degree  of  envy  was  ex- 
cited against  him.  From  this  envy  proceeded  hatred;  until  at 
length  the  court  eunuchs,  at  the  instigation  of  those  who  had  lost 
their  command,  accused  him  to  the  emperor,  who  by  these  means 
was  induced  to  entertain  unjust  suspicions  of  him.  Sebastianus 
sent  a  request  to  the  emperor,  desiring  him  to  remain  where  he 
then  was,  and  not  to  advance ;  since  it  was  not  easy  to  bring  such  a 
multitude  to  a  regular  engagement.  He,  moreover,  observed  that 
it  would  be  better  to  protract  the  war  in  harassing  them  by  am- 
buscades, until  they  should  be  reduced  to  despair  from  the  want 
of  necessaries,  and  rather  than  expose  themselves  to  the  misery 
and  destruction  of  famine,  either  surrender  themselves,  or  depart 
from  the  Roman  territory  and  submit  to  the  Huns.  While  he 
gave  the  emperor  this  counsel,  his  adversaries  persuaded  him  to 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  107 

march  forward  with  his  whole  army;  that  the  Barbarians  were 
almost  destroyed,  and  the  emperor  might  gain  a  victory  without 
trouble.  Their  counsel,  though  the  least  prudent,  so  far  prevailed, 
that  the  emperor  led  forth  his  whole  army  without  order.  The 
Barbarians  resolutely  opposed  them,  and  gained  so  signal  a  vic- 
tory, that  they  slew  all,  except  a  few  with  whom  the  emperor  fled 
into  an  unfortified  village.  The  Barbarians,  therefore,  sur- 
rounded the  place  with  a  quantity  of  wood,  which  they  set  on 
lire.  All  who  had  fled  thither,  together  with  the  inhabitants, 
were  consumed  in  the  flames,  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  the 
body  of  the  emperor  could  never  be  found. 

When  the  affairs  of  the  empire  were  reduced  to  this  low  con- 
dition, Victor,  who  commanded  the  Roman  cavalry,  escaping  the 
danger  with  some  of  his  troops,  entered  Macedon  and  Thessaly. 
From  thence  he  proceeded  into  Mcesia  and  Pannonia,  and  in- 
formed Gratian,  who  was  then  in  that  quarter,  of  what  had  oc- 
curred, and  of  the  loss  of  the  emperor  and  his  army.  Gratian  re- 
£eived  the  intelligence  without  uneasiness,  and  was  little  grieved 
at  the  death  of  his  uncle,  a  disagreement  having  existed  between 
them.  Finding  himself  unable  to  manage  affairs,  Thrace  being 
ravaged  by  the  Barbarians,  as  were  likewise  Pannonia  and  Moesia, 
and  the  towns  upon  the  Rhine  being  infested  by  the  neighbour- 
ing Barbarians  without  controul,  he  chose  for  his  associate  in 
the  empire,  Theodosius,  who  was  a  native  of  a  town  called 
Cauca,  in  the  part  of  Spain  called  Hispania  Callagcia,  and  who 
possessed  great  knowledge  and  experience  of  military  affairs. 
Having  given  him  the  government  of  Thrace  and  the  eastern  pro- 
vinces, Gratian  himself  proceeded  to  the  west  of  Gaul,  in  order, 
if  possible,  to  compose  affairs  in  that  quarter. 

During  the  stay  of  the  new  emperor,  Theodosius,  at  Thesslo- 
nica,  a  great  concourse  arrived  there  from  all  parts  of  persons  so- 
liciting him  on  business,  both  public  and  private ;  who  having 
obtained  of  him  whatever  he  could  conveniently  grant,  returned 
to  their  homes.  As  a  great  multitude  of  the  Scythians  beyond 
the  Ister,  the  Gotthi,  and  the  Taiphali,  and  other  tribes  that  for- 
merly dwelt  among  them,  had  crossed  the  river,  and  were  driven 
to  infest  the  Roman  dominions,  because  the  Huns  had  expelled 
them  from  their  own  country,  the  emperor  Theodosius  prepared 
for  war  with  all  his  forces.  All  Thrace  being  now  in  the  posses- 
sion of  the  above  mentioned  tribes,  and  the  garrisons  of  the  towns 
and  castles  not  daring  to  move  out  of  their  walls,  much  less  to  en- 
gage in  the  open  field,  Modares,  who  was  of  the  royal  family  of 
the  Scythians,  and  had  not  long  before  come  over  to  the  Romans, 


108  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 

and  for  his  fidelity  had  been  made  a  general,  placed  his  soldiers 
on  the  summit  of  a  hill,  which  formed  a  spacious  plain,  and  lay 
there  unknown  to  the  Barbarians.  Learning  from  his  scouts, 
that  the  enemy  were  in  the  fields  below,  luxuriously  consuming 
the  provisions  they  had  plundered,  by  which  they  had  intoxicated 
themselves,  he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  take  with  them  only 
their  swords  and  bucklers,  and  not  their  heavy  armour  as  usual, 
and  to  attack  the  Barbarians  while  they  were  immersed  in  volup- 
tuousness. This  they  performed,  and  destroyed  in  a  very  short 
space  of  time  all  the  Barbarians,  many  of  them  dying  'insensibly, 
and  others  immediately  on  feeling  their  wounds.  Having  slain 
all  they  began  to  rifle  the  bodies,  and  from  thence  proceeded  to 
the  women  and  children.  They  took  four  thousand  carriages, 
and  as  many  captives  as  could  be  contained  in  them,  besides  many 
who  usually  walked,  and  only  rode  alternately  when  fatigued. 

The  army  having  made  this  good  use  of  the  occasion  afforded 
by  fortune,,  the  affairs  of  Thrace,  which  had  been  on  the  brink 
of  ruin,  were  now,  the  Barbarians  being  crushed  beyond  all  hope, 
re-established  in  peace. 

.  The  eastern  provinces  were  now  in  the  most  imminent  danger, 
from  the  following  causes.  When  the  Huns,  as  I  have  related; 
had  invaded  the  countries  beyond  the  Ister,  the  Scythians,  being 
unable  to  withstand  their  incursions,  intreated  the  emperor  Va- 
lens,  who  was  then  living,  to  admit  them  into  Thrace,  promising, 
in  perfect  submission  to  his  commands,  to  perform  the  duty  of 
faithful  soldiers  and  subjects.  By  this  promise  Valens  was  in- 
duced to  receive  them;  and  imagining  that  it  would  be  a  surety 
of  their  fidelity  to  cause  all  their  young  children  to  be  brought 
up  in  a  different  country,  he  sent  a  great  number  of  infants  into 
the  east,  and  appointed  Julius  to  superintend  their  maintenance 
and  education,  conceiving  him  to  be  a  person  of  competent  un- 
derstanding for  the  fulfilment  of  both  those  offices.  He,  there- 
fore, distributed  them  into  various  towns,  to  prevent  them,  when 
grown  to  manhood,  from  having  an  opportunity,  by  being  col- 
lected in  great  numbers,  of  forming  an  insurrection.  However, 
when  they  had  attained  maturity,  the  intelligence  of  what  their 
countrymen  had  suffered  in  Thrace  reached  them  in  the  different 
towns.  This  gave  them  much  uneasiness;  those  of  one  city  as- 
sembling together  and  sending  private  information  to  those  in 
other  places,  that  they  intended  to  assault  the  Roman  towns  in 
revenge  for  the  sufferings  of  their  countrymen.  Meantime  Ju^ 
lius,  discovering  the  design  of  the  Barbarians,  was  in  doubt  how 
to  act.  At  length  he  resolved  not  to  give  Theodosius  information 


BOOK  ir.  OF    ZOSIMUS.  109 

of  the  conspiracy,  not  only  because  he  was  then  in  Macedon, 
but  that  he  had  been  appointed  to  that  charge  by  Vaiens,  and 
not  by  Theodosius,  who  scarcely  knew  him.  He,  therefore,  pri- 
vately sent  letters  to  the  senate  of  Constantinople.  Being  autho- 
rised by  them  to  proceed  as  he  deemed  most  couducive  to  the 
public  good,  he  averted  the  danger  with  which  the  towns  were 
menaced  by  the  following  measures.  He  sent  for  all  the  officers, 
and,  before  he  disclosed  to  them  his  design,  required  them  to  take 
an  oath  of  secresy.  Being  informed  of  it,  and  instructed  how  to 
act,  they  reported  among  the  Barbarians  of  each  town,  that  the 
emperor  intended  to  bestow  on  them  considerable  presents,  both 
in  money  and  land,  in  order  to  bind  them  in  gratitude  to  himself 
and  the  Roman  people.  For  this  purpose  they  were  ordered  to 
assemble  on  a  particular  day  in  the  principal  cities.  This  intel- 
ligence was  so  gratifying  to  the  Barbarians,  that  their  fury  consi- 
derably abated.  Upon  the  appointed  day  they  all  attended  at 
the  places  at  which  they  were  desired  to  meet.  When  they  were 
arrived,  the  soldiers,  on  the  signal  being  made,  mounted  upon  the 
roofs  of  the  houses  in  the  respective  market-places  in  which  they 
were  stationed,  and  cast  at  the  Barbarians  such  numbers  of  darts 
and  stones,  that  they  killed  every  man.  Thus  were  the  eastern 
cities  delivered  from  their  apprehensions,  and,  by  the  prudence 
of  the  officers,  the  disasters  of  the  east  and  of  Thrace  were  ter- 
minated. 

Meanwhile,  the  emperor  Theodosius,  residing  in  Thessalonica, 
was  easy  of  access  to  all  who  wished  to  see  him.  Having  com- 
menced his  reign  in  luxury  and  indolence,  he  threw  the  magis- 
tracy into  disorder,  and  increased  the  number  of  his  military  offi- 
cers. There  had  previously  been  but  one  general  or  master  of 
the  horse,  and  one  of  the  foot,  but  he  now  distributed  those  of- 
iices  to  more  than  five  persons.  Each  of  these  was  allowed  the 
same  stipend  which  either  of  the  two  had  before  enjoyed.  It  was 
likewise  oppressive  to  the  soldiers  to  be  exposed  to  the  avarice 
of  so  many  commanders  ;  for  each  of  them  endeavoured  to  extort 
from  the  allowance  of  the  soldiers  as  much  as  one  of  the  former 
two.  He  likewise  increased  the  number  of  subaltern  officers  to 
more  than  double  the  original  number,  nor  could  the  soldiers  ob^ 
tain  the  smallest  part  of  their  allowance.  All  this  was  occasioned 
by  the  negligence  and  excessive  avarice  of  the  emperor.  He  it 
was  who  introduced  so  vast  an  expenceat  the  imperial  table,  that 
to  serve  it  with  such  an  extensive  variety  of  dishes,  whole  legions 
of  cooks,  butlers,  and  other  attendants,  were  employed.  The 
number  of  eunuchs  in  the  service  of  the  emperor  was  immense, 


110  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 

most  of  whom,  and  particularly  those  of  handsome  persons,  dis- 
graced at  their  pleasure  any  magistrate  or  officer.  The  whole 
government  was,  in  effect,  at  their  disposal ;  the  emperor  being 
guided  by  their  pleasure,  and  changing  his  sentiments  at  their  de- 
sire. As  he  squandered  the  public  money  without  consideration, 
bestowing  it  on  unworthy  persons,  he  consequently  impoverished 
himself.  He  therefore  sold  the  government  of  provinces  to  any 
who  would  purchase  them,  without  regard  to  the  reputation  or 
ablity  of  the  persons,  esteeming  him  the  best  qualified  who  brought 
him  the  most  gold  or  silver.  Goldsmiths,  bankers,  and  even  the 
meanest  professions,  were  therefore  seen  wearing  the  ensigns  of 
magistracy,  and  selling  the  provinces  to  the  best  bidders. 

A  change  so  great  and  unfortunate  having  occurred  in  the 
state,  the  army  became,  weak,  and  was  soon  annihilated.  All  the 
cities  were  likewise  drained  of  money,  partly  by  the  excessive 
imposts  and  partly  by  the  rapacity  of  the  magistrates.  For  if  any 
failed  to  appease  their  insatiable  demands,  they  suborned  villain? 
to  accuse  them ;  thus  acting  as  with  the  purpose  of  recovering 
what  they  had  paid  for  their  offices.  The  inhabitants  of  the 
towns  lived  in  misery  through  their  own  poverty  and  the  ini- 
quity of  the  magistrates;  their  only  resource  being  to  intreat  the 
gods  to  deliver  them  from  such  afflictions ;  for  hitherto  they  were 
permitted  to  enter  the  temples,  and  to  worship  the  gods  in  the 
manner  of  their  country. 

Theodosius,  observing  that  the  army  was  considerably  dimi- 
nished, permitted  as  many  of  the  Barbarians  beyond  the  Ister  as 
were  willing  to  enter  his  own  army.  Many  of  them  were  induced 
by  his  promises,  and  were  embodied  with  the  legions;  conceiving 
that  when  more  of  them  should  be  collected,  they  might  attack 
the  government,  and  without  difficulty  acquire  possession  of  the 
sovereignty.  The  emperor,  however,  having  reviewed  these  fu- 
gitives, who  were  very  numerous,  and  already  exceeded  in  number 
the  other  soldiers,  reflected  on  the  difficulty  of  restraining  them, 
Rhould  they  be  inclined  to  infringe  their  promise  of  obedience. 
He  therefore  judged  it  most  prudent  to  place  some  of  them 
among  the  legions  that  were  in  Egypt,  and  to  supply  their  place 
in  his  army  with  a  detachment  from  thence.  This  being  effected, 
the  one  party  coming  and  the  other  going  according  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  emperor,  the  Egyptians  marched  through  the  diffe- 
rent towns  with  great  order,  and  paid  for  what  they  received  ; 
but  the  conduct  of  the  Barbarians  was  very  turbulent,  and  they  dis- 
posed of  all  in  the  various  markets  atwtheir  pleasure.  When  both 
met  in  Philadelphia,  acityofLydia,  the  Egyptians  were  attentive 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  Hi 

to  the  orders  of  their  officers,  while  the  Barbarians,  who  exceeded 
them  in  number,  were  regardless  of  all  commands.  A  trades- 
man in  the  market-place  demanding  money  for  goods  that  he  had 
sold  to  a  Barbarian,  the  Barbarian  drew  his  sword  and  wounded 
him.  Upon  this  the  man  cried  out,  and  another  was  then  wounded 
who  ran  to  assist  him.  The  Egyptians,  who  were  grieved  at  the 
sight  of  so  evil  an  action,  mildly  admonished  the  Barbarians  to 
desist  from  actions  so  base  and  unjust,  which  were  disgraceful  to 
men  who  lived  under  the  Roman  laws.  Their  advice  however 
had  no  weight  with  the  Barbarians,  who  drew  against  them  also, 
until  at  length  the  Egyptians  yielded  to  resentment,  and  attacking 
them,  killed  more  than  two  hundred,  wounded  some,  and  com- 
pelled many  of  them  to  take  refuge  in  the  sewers,  where  they 
died.  When  the  Egyptians  had  thus  rendered  the  Barbarians  at 
Philadelphia  more  orderly,  they  continued  their  journey,  and  the 
Barbarians  proceeded  towards  Egypt.  They  were  commanded 
by  Hormisdas,  the  son  of  the  Hormisdas,  who  had  attended  the 
emperor  Julian  in  the  Persian  war.  When  the  Egyptians  arrived 
in  Macedon,  and  were  united  with  the  legions  there,  no  order  was 
observed  in  the  camp,  nor  was  any  distinction  made  between  a 
Roman  and  a  Barbarian,  but  all  were  promiscuously  mingled  to- 
gether, nor  was  even  a  muster-roll  kept  with  the  names  of  the 
soldiers.  It  was  likewise  permitted  to  the  Barbarians  to  return 
to  their  own  country,  and  to  send  others  in  lieu  of  themselves  to 
serve  in  the  legions,  and  when  they  pleased,  again  to  serve  under 
the  Romans. 

The  Barbarians  on  learning  the  disordered  state  of  the  army, 
of  which  the  fugitives  informed  them,  and  of  the  free  access  they 
had  to  it,  thought  this  a  convenient  opportunity  to  make  an  at- 
tempt against  the  Romans,  who  conducted  their  affairs  so  negli- 
gently. Having  therefore  passed  the  river  without  difficulty, 
they  penetrated  as  far  as  Macedon  without  opposition,  since  the 
fugitives  suffered  them  to  proceed  unmolested.  Perceiving  that 
the  emperor  was  advancing  to  meet  them  with  all  his  forces,  and 
being  guided  at  midnight  by  a  large  fire  which  they  conjectured 
to  be  near  his  person,  and  likewise  understood  to  be  so  from 
the  countrymen  who  deserted  to  them,  they  assaulted  the  em~ 
peror's  tent.  Being  now  joined  by  their  countrymen,  they  were 
opposed  by  the  Romans  alone.  These  being  comparatively  a 
small  number  could  only  enable  the  emperor  to  escape,  but  were 
themselves  nearly  all  slain,  after  having  fought  courageously  and 
killed  a  great  number  of  the  Barbarians.  Had  the  Barbarians 
followed  up  their  advantage,  and  pursued  those  who  fled  with 


it*  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv, 

the  emperor,  they  would  certainly  have  had  them  all  immediately 
in  their  power.  But  being  satisfied  with  what  they  had  gained, 
and  having  made  themselves  masters  of  Macedpn  and  Thessaly, 
which  were  without  protection,  they  left  the  towns  uninjured,  hi 
hopes  of  receiving  a  tribute  from  them,uf<* 

The  emperor,  on  learning  that  they  had  for  that  reason  marched 
home,  secured  the  castles,  strengthened  the  towns  with  garrisons, 
and  proceeded  to  Constantinople,  having  sent  letters  to  the  em- 
peror Gratian  to  inform  him  of  what  had  occurred,  and  that  the 
danger  was  so  extreme  that  it  was  necessary  to  send  assistance 
without  delay.  After  having  dispatched  couriers  with  this  mes- 
sage, he  did  not  attend  to  the  sufferings  of  Macedon  and  Thes- 
saly, but  appointed  persons  to  collect  the  tribute  whom  he 
knew  to  be  extremely  severe  in  exacting  it.  Thus  whatever  had 
been  spared  by  the  humanity  of  the  Barbarians  was  seized  as  tri- 
bute, not  only  their  money  being  taken,  but  even  the  ornaments 
of  the  women,  and  their  clothes,  reducing  them  almost  to  naked- 
ness to  satisfy  the  demands  for  taxes.  Every  town  was  therefore 
filled  with  tears  and  complaints,  all  calling  out  for  the  Barba- 
rians, and  desiring  their  assistance. 

Such  was  the  state  of  Macedon  and  Thessaly,  while  at  the  same 
time  the  emperor  Theodosius  made  his  entrance  into  Constanti- 
nople with  great  pomp,  as  if  in  triumph  for  some  important  vic- 
tory, without  regarding  the  public  calamities,  but  proportioning 
the  magnitude  of  his  luxury  to  that  of  the  city.*  Gratian,  who 
was  much  disturbed  by  the  intelligence,  sent  a  sufficient  force 
under  the  command  of  Baudo,  accompanied  by  Arbogastes.  Both 
of  these  were  Franks,  but  strongly  attached  to  the  Romans,  free 
from  corruption  or  avarice,  and  prudent  as  well  as  brave  soldiers. 
When  they  arrived  with  the  army  in  Macedon  and  Thessaly,  the 
Scythians  who  were  there  pillaging  all  before  them,  on  perceiving 
the  resolution  of  these  commanders,  immediately  retired  into 
Thrace,  which  they  had  previously  plundered.  Being  in  doubt 
how  to  act,  they  made  use  of  the  same  stratagem  as  before,  and 
endeavoured  to  delude  Theodosius  with  the  same  device.  They 
sent  to  him  fugitives  of  the  lowest  rank  to  promise  him  the  ut- 

*  Paul  Diaconus,  in  his  12th  Book,  speaks  of  him  totally  otherwise,  lie 
observes,  "  Those  vices  with  which  he  is  aspersed,  namely,  that  he  was  a 
drunkard,  and  very  ambitious  for  triumph,  he  held  in  such  abhorrence,  that 
he  made  no  wars,  though  he  found  some.  He  prohibited  bylaw  all  lascivious- 
ness,  and  forbade  minstrels  to  be  used  at  feasts."  We  must  however  excuse 
this  in  Zosimus,  since  with  him  it  was  equivalent  to  the  greatest  crimes, 
merely  to  be  a  Christian. 


BOOK  iv.  OFZOSIMUS. 


most  fidelity  and  obedience,  whom  he  believed  and  entertained. 
Lest  his  former  experience  should  render  him  sensible  of  his  own 
interest,  these  were  followed  by  many  more,  whom  he  received 
in  a  similar  manner,  until,  through  the  folly  of  the  emperor,  the 
fugitives  had  again  gained  great  influence.  His  folly  was  daily 
augmented  by  his  voluptuous  course  of  life;  for  whatever  con- 
tributes to  the  relaxation  of  morals,  received  in  his  reign  such  en- 
couragement, that  every  person,  who  affected  to  imitate  the  empe- 
ror, placed  all  human  happiness  in  such  pursuits.  He  encouraged 
mimics,  and  dancers,  and  that  dissolute  and  lascivious  music, 
which  was  in  use  during  his  reign  and  subsequently,  and  all  that 
could  conduce  to  obscenity,  to  such  a  degree,  that  the  empire  was 
totally  ruined  by  those  who  imitated  that  species  of  madness. 
Add  to  this,  that  the  temples  of  the  gods  were  every  where  vio- 
lated, nor  was  it  safe  for  any  one  to  profess  a  belief  that  there 
are  any  gods,  much  less  to  look  up  to  heaven  and  to  adore  them. 

While  Theodosius  was  thus  occupied,  the  emperor  Gratian 
sent  Vitalianus  to  command  the  Illyrian  legions,  a  person  by  no 
means  calculated  to  raise  them  from  their  depressed  condition. 
Meantime  the  Celtic  nations  were  harrassed  by  two  bands  of 
Germans  from  beyond  the  Rhine,  one  of  which  was  commanded 
by  Fritigerne,  the  other  by  Ailothus  and  Safraces.  The  emperor 
was  therefore  compelled  to  permit  them,  on  condition  of  leaving 
the  Celtic  provinces,  to  cross  the  Ister  and  to  enter  Pannonia  and 
the  Upper  Mresia.  His  design  and  endeavour  was  to  free  himself 
from  their  continual  incursions.  They  therefore  passed  the  Ister, 
with  the  intention  of  proceeding  through  Pannonia  into  Epirus, 
and  after  crossing  the  river  Achelous,  to  attack  the  cities  of 
Greece.  They  first  determined  to  supply  themselves  with  a  store 
of  provisions,  and  to  remove  Athoinaricus,  the  head  of  the  royal 
family  of  Scy  thia,  that  none  might  be  left  in  their  rear  to  impede 
or  prevent  their  enterprize.  They  accordingly  attacked  him,  and 
easily  drove  him  from  the  places  where  he  lay.  He  therefore  re- 
paired with  great  expedition  to  Theodosius,  who  was  then  reco- 
vering from  a  disease  which  had  nearly  caused  his  death.  Theo- 
dosiusgavea  kind  reception  both  to  him  and  to  the  Barbarians  who 
followed  him,  even  proceeding  some  distance  from  Constanti- 
nople to  meet  him.  Nor  did  he  afterwards  treat  him  with  less 
respect,  but  at  his  death,  which  happened  shortly  afterwards, 
interred  him  in  a  royal  sepulchre,  which  was  so  magnificent,  that 
the  Barbarians  were  filled  with  amazement  at  its  extreme  splen- 
dour, and  returned  to  their  country  without  offering  any  further 
molestation  to  the  Romans,  so  charmed  were  they  with  the 

VOL.  1.  NO,  3.  p 


114 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 


liberality  and  magnificence  of  the  emperor.  They  who  had  fol- 
ovved  the  deceased  chief  likewise  kept  a  continual  guard  on  the 
bank  of  the  river,  to  prevent  any  incursions  being  made  against 
the  Romans. 

At  the  same  time  Theodosius  had  additional  good  fortune.  He 
repulsed  the  Scyri  and  Carpodaces,  who  were  mixed  with  the 
Huns,  and  so  defeated  them  as  to  compel  them  to  cross  the  Ister, 
and  to  return  into  their  own  country.  The  success  of  the  emperor 
revived  the  courage  of  the  soldiers,  who  now  appeared  to  recover 
from  their  former  calamities.  The  husbandmen  had  now  the 
liberty  of  cultivating  their  lands,  and  of  feeding  their  cattle  with 
security.  Thus  did  Theodosius  appear  to  repair  their  losses. 
Meanwhile  Prornotus,  who  was  commander  of  the  forces  in 
Thrace,  encountered  with  ^Edotheus,  who  had  levied  an  im- 
mense army,  not  only  among  the  nations  upon  the  Ister,  but 
among  others  situated  in  unknown  countries  at  a  great  distance, 
which  he  was  then  leading  across  the  river.  Promotus  here  made 
such  havoc  among  the  troops,  that  the  river  was  filled  with  dead 
bodies,  and  the  number  which  fell  on  the  shore  was  almost  too 
great  to  be  counted. 

While  the  affairs  of  Thrace  were  thus  situated,  those  of  Gra- 
tian  were  in  great  perplexity.  Having  accepted  the  counsel  of 
those  courtiers  who  usually  corrupt  the  manners  of  princes,  he 
gave  a  reception  to  some  fugitives  called  Alani,  whom  he  not 
only  introduced  into  his  army,  but  honoured  with  valuable  pre- 
sents, and  confided  to  them  his  most  important  secrets,  esteeming 
his  own  soldiers  of  little  value.  This  produced  among  his  soldiers 
a  violent  hatred  against  him,  which  being  gradually  inflamed  and 
augmented  incited  in  them  a  disposition  for  innovation,  and  most 
particularly  in  that  part  of  them  which  was  in  Britain,  since  they 
•were  the  most  resolute  and  vindictive.  In  this  spirit  they  were 
encouraged  by  Maximus,  a  Spaniard,  who  had  been  the  fellow- 
soldier  of  Theodosius  in  Britain.  He  was  offended  that  Theodo- 
sius should  be  thought  worthy  of  being-  made  emperor,  while 
he  himself  had  no  honourable  employment.  He  therefore  che- 
rished the  animosity  of  the  soldiers  towards  the  emperor.  They 
•were  thus  easily  induced  to  revolt  and  to  declare  Maximus  em- 
peror. Having  presented  to  him  the  purple  robe  and  the  diadem, 
they  sailed  to  the  mouth  of  the  Rhine.  As  the  German  army, 
and  all  who  were  in  that  quarter  approved  of  the  election,  Gra- 
tian  prepared  to  contend  against  Maximus,  with  a  considerable 
part  of  the  army  which  still  adhered  to  him.  When  the  armies 
met,  there  were  only  slight  skirmishes  for  five  days;  until  Gratian, 


BOOK    IV. 


OFZOS1MUS  115 


perceiving  that  the  Mauritanian  cavalry  first  deserted  from  him 
and  declared  Maximus  Augustus,  and  afterwards  that  the  re- 
mainder of  his  troops  by  degrees  espoused  the  cause  of  his  anta- 
gonist, relinquished  all  hope,  and  fled  with  three  hundred  horse 
to  the  Alps.  Finding  those  regions  without  defence,  he  proceeded 
towards  Rhaetia,  Noricum,  Pannonia,  and  the  Upper  Moesia. 
When  Maximus  was  informed  of  his  route,  he  was  not  negligent 
of  the  opportunity,  but  detached  Andragathius,  commander  of 
the  cavalry,  who  was  his  faithful  adherent,  in  pursuit  of  Gratian. 
This  officer  followed  him  with  so  great  speed,  that  he  overtook 
him  when  he  was  passing  the  bridge  at  Sigidunus,  and  put  him 
to  death.  By  which  exploit  he  confirmed  the  authority  of 
Maximus. 

Upon  this  occasion  it  may  not  be  improper  to  relate  a  circum- 
stance which  has  some  reference  to  the  present  part  of  my  nar- 
ration.     Among  the  Romans,  the  persons  who  had  the  superin- 
tendance  of  sacred  things  were  the  Pontifices  9  whom  we  may  term 
Gephyrcei,  if  we  translate  the  Latin  word  Pontifices,  which  sig- 
nifies bridge-makers,  into  the  Greek.  The  origin  of  that  appellation 
was  this  :  At  a  period  before  mankind  were  acquainted  with  the 
mode  of  worshipping  by  statues,  some  images  of  the  gods  were 
first  made  in  Thessaly.      As  there  were  not  then  any  temples 
(for  the  use  of  them  was  likewise  then  unknown),  they  fixed  up 
those  figures  of  the  gods  on  a  bridge  over  the  river  Peneus,  and 
called  those  who  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  Gephyrcei,  Priests  of  the 
Bridge,  from  the  place   where  the  images  were   first  erected. 
Hence  the  Romans,  deriving  it  from  the  Greeks,  called  their  own 
priests  Pontifices,  and  enacted  a  law,  that  kings,  for  the  sake  of 
dignity,  should  be  considered  of  the  number.     The  first  of  their 
kings  who  enjoyed  this  dignity  was  Numa  Pompilius.     After  him 
it   was   conferred  not  only  upon  the  kings  but  upon  Octavianus 
and  his  successors  in  the  Roman  empire.     Upon  the  elevation  of 
any  one  to  the  imperial  dignity,  the  pontifices  brought  him  the 
priestly  habit,  and  he  was  immediately  styled,  Pontif  ex  Maximus t 
or  chief  priest.     All  former  emperors,  indeed,  appeared  gratified 
with  the  distinction,  and  willingly  adopted  the  title.     Even  Con- 
stantine  himself,  when  he  was  emperor,  accepted  it,  although  he 
was  seduced  from  the  path  of  rectitude  in  regard  to  sacred  affairs, 
and  had  embraced  the  Christian  faith.      In  like  manner  did  all 
who  succeeded  him  to  Valentinian  and  Valens.     But  when  the 
Pontifices,  in  the  accustomed  manner,  brought  the  sacred  robe  to 
Gratian,  he,  considering  it  a  garment  unlawful  for  a  Christian  to 
use,  rejected  their  offer.     When  the  robe  was  restored  to  the 


115  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  TV, 

priests  who  brought  it,  their  chief  is  said  to  have  made  this  ob- 
servation, It'  the  emperor  refuses  to  become  Pontifex,  we  shall: 
soon  make  one. 

The  reign  of  Gratian  being  thus  terminated,  Maximus,  who 
now   considered  himself  firmly  fixed  in  the  empire,  sent  an  em- 
bassy to  the  emperor  Theodosius,  not  to  intreat  pardon  for  his 
treatment  of  Gratian,  but  rather    to  increase  his  provocations. 
The  person  employed  in  this  mission  was  the  imperial  chamber- 
lain (for  Maximus  would  not  suifer  an  eunuch  to  preside  in  his 
court),  a  prudent  person,  with  whom  he  had  been  familiarly  ac- 
quainted from  his  infancy.     The  purport  of  his  mission  was  to 
propose  to  Theodosius  a  treaty  of  amity,  and  of  alliance,  against 
all  enemies  who  should  make  war  on  the  Romans,  and  on  refusal 
to  declare  against  him  open  hostility.     Upon  this,  Theodosius  ad- 
mitted Maximus  to  a  share  in  the  empire,  and  in  the  honour  of 
his  statues  and  his  imperial  title.      Nevertheless,  he  was  at  the 
same  time  privately  preparing  for  war,  and  endeavouring  to  de- 
ceive Maximus  by  every  species  of  flattery  and  observance.      He 
gave  instructions  to  Cynegius,  the  prefect  of  his  court,  whom  he 
had  sent  into  Egypt  in  order  to  prohibit  there  all  worship  of  the 
gods,  and  to  shut  up  their  temples,  that  he  should  shew  the  sta- 
tue  of  Maximus   to   the   Alexandrians,   and  erect  it    in   some 
public  place,  declaring  to  the  people,    that  he  was   associated 
to  himself  in  the  empire.      In  this   Cynegius  obeyed  his  com- 
mands,  closing  up   the   doors  of  the  temples  throughout  the 
east,   Egypt,   and    Alexandria,  and  prohibited  all  their  ancient 
sacrifices  and  customary  observances.   As  to  the  calamities  which 
the  Roman  empire  suffered,  from  that  period,  a  distinct  account 
of  the  facts  themselves  will  be  the  best  demonstration. 

About  this  time,  a  nation  of  Scythia  made  its  appearance  from 
beyond  the  Ister,  who  were  never  before  known  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  those  countries.  They  are  called,  by  the  Barbarians  in 
those  parts,  the  Prothyngi.  These  being  very  numerous,  fur- 
nished with  arms  of  every  description,  and  remarkably  robust, 
easily  overpowered  the  Barbarians  of  the  interior,  proceeded  as* 
far  as  the  banks  of  the  Ister,  and  demanded  permission  to  cross* 
that  river.  Promotus,  the  commander  of  the  forces  in  that  quar- 
ter, drew  out  his  troops  as  far  as  he  could  extend  them  along  the 
bank  of  the  river,  and  hindered  the  passage  of  the  Barbarians. 
While  he  was  thus  employed,  he  invented  a  stratagem  to  this  ef- 
fect. He  called  to  him  some  of  his  own  soldiers,  who  understood 
their  language,  and  in  whom  he  could  confide  in  affairs  of  that 
nature,  and  sent  them  to  agree  with  the  Barbarians  upon  betraying 


iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  117 

their  own  party.  These  men  proposed  to  the  Barbarians  to  deliver 
the  whole  army  into  their  hands  in  consideration  of  a  large  re^ 
ward.  The  Barbarians  replied,  that  they  were  not  able  to  give 
so  much.  However,  to  induce  them  to  believe  their  promises, 
they  adhered  to  their  original  proposals,  and  would  not  abate  in 
any  part  of  the  reward.  At  length  they  agreed  to  the  sum,  which 
was  in  part  to  be  paid  immediately,  and  the  remainder  at  the  ac- 
complishment of  the  treason.  Having  arranged  the  method  of 
giving  the  signal,  and  the  time  for  the  execution  of  the  project, 
they  communicated  to  the  commander  each  circumstance ;  that 
the  Barbarians  would  commence  the  enterprize  in  the  night,  and 
would  cross  the  river  to  attack  the  Roman  army. 

The  Barbarians,  therefore,  having  placed  all   their  best  troops 
on  board  a  great  number  of  small  vessels,  commanded  them  to 
cross  over  first,  and  to  fall  on  the  soldiers  while  they  were  asleep. 
Next  to  these,  they  sent  those   of  an  inferior  description  to  sup- 
port the  former  when  they  had  commenced  the  attack  ;  and  after 
them  the  useless  multitude  of  every  age,  who  are  ready  to  boast 
of  victories  which  others  have  gained.     Promotus  having  been 
previously  informed  of  all  their  arrangements,  was  fully  prepared 
against  their   designs.     He  therefore  ranged  his  ships  in  a  triple 
line  close  together  along  the  side  of  the  river,  the  length  of  twen- 
ty   stadia.     By  this  plan  he  not  only  prevented  the  enemy  from 
crossing  over,  but  sunk  many  of  them  in  their  vessels.     The 
night  being  dark  and  without  a  moon,  the  Barbarians  were  un- 
acquainted   with  the  preparations  which  the  Romans  had  made, 
and    therefore  embarked  with  great  silence,  supposing  the  Ro- 
mans to  be  ignorant  of  their  design.     When  the  signal  was  made, 
the  Romans  sailed  up  to  them   in  large  and  strong  ships  with 
firm  oars,  and  sunk  all  that  they  met,  among  which  not  one  man 
was  saved  by  swimming,  their  arms  being  very  heavy.     The  ves- 
sels which  escaped  from  the  Roman  ships,  upon  approaching  those 
which  lay  along  shore,  were  so  assaulted  with  whatever  was  at 
hand,  that  they  and  all  on  board  were  lost  at  the  same  time,  nor 
were  any  of  them  able  to  pass  this  wall  of  Roman  vessels. 

This  produced  among  them  an  immense  slaughter,  greaterthan 
had  ever  occurred  in  any  former  naval  action.  Thus  the  river 
was  filled  with  dead  bodies  and  with  arms.  As  many  of  them 
as  were  able  to  swim  to  the  bank  were  destroyed  by  those  who  were 
ranged  along  it  The  engagement  being  ended,  the  soldiers  be- 
gan to  plunder.  They  carried  away  all  the  women  and  children, 
and  acquired  possession  of  all  the  provisions.  Promotus  then 
sent  for  Theodosius,  who  was  not  far  from  thence,  to  witness 


118 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  IT. 


his  brave  exploit.  When  he  beheld  the  number  of  prisoners,  and 
the  quantity  of  spoil,  he  gave  the  captives  their  liberty,  and  by 
bestowing  gifts  upon  them,  endeavoured  to  attach  them  to  him- 
self, supposing  that  they  would  be  of  service  to  him  in  a  war 
against  Maximus. 

Another  occurrence  which  happened  at  that  period  is  worthy 
of  being  related.  In  the  part  of  Scythia  contiguous  to  Thrace  is 
a  town  called  Tomi,  in  which  was  a  garrison  commanded  by  Ge- 
rontius,  a  stout  and  valuable  soldier.  Before  that  town  was 
placed  a  select  corps  of  Barbarians,  who  excelled  the  rest  of  their 
countrymen  in  strength  and  courage.  Although  these  men  were 
favoured  by  the  emperor  with  a  larger  allowance  of  corn  and 
other  provisions  than  any  other  of  the  soldiers;  yet  they  did 
not  repay  these  distinctions  with  good  will,  but  with  hatred  to  the 
governor  of  the  town,  and  contempt  of  the  Roman  soldiers.  Ge- 
rontius  on  discovering  their  design,  which  was  to  attack  the  town, 
and  to  confuse  the  government,  consulted  with  his  most  prudent 
soldiers  on  the  method  of  punishing  those  insolent  Barbarians. 
Finding  them  fearful,  and  consequently  backward  in  giving  their 
assent,  he  took  his  arms,  and  issued  with  a  few  of  his  guards  to 
engage  the  whole  body  of  Barbarians.  Having  opened  the  gates, 
he  marched  out  against  them,  while  his  soldiers  were  yet  asleep, 
and  shackled  by  fear  as  by  a  chain,  or  had  mounted  the  wall  to  wit- 
ness what  should  occur.  Meantime  the  Barbarians  laughed  at 
the  temerity  of  Gerontius,  and  thinking  him  desirous  of  death, 
sent  against  him  men  of  extraordinary  strength.  Gerontius  en- 
gaged with  the  first  man  whom  he  encountered,  who  immediately 
catching  hold  of  his  buckler  resolutely  opposed  him.  At  length, 
one  of  the  guards,  who  saw  them  closed,  coming  to  his  assistance, 
cut  off*  the  arm  of  the  Barbarian,  and  caused  him  to  fall  from  his 
horse.  While  the  Barbarians  stood  in  astonishment  at  his  cou- 
rage and  audacity,  Gerontius  attacked  others  of  the  enemy.  The 
soldiers  upon  the  wall,  witnessing  the  exploits  of  their  com- 
mander, recollected  that  they  were  Romans,  and  sallying  out, 
killed  most  of  the  Barbarians,  who  were  astonished  at  so  sudden 
an  eruption.  A  few  only  of  them  escaped  to  an  edifice,  which 
was  held  in  high  veneration  by  the  Christians,  and  esteemed  an 
asylum  or  sanctuary. 

Gerontius,  having  delivered  this  partof  Scythia  from  all  impend- 
ing dangers,  and  from  the  Barbarians  who  had  formed  attempts 
against  it,  but  were  subdued  by  his  remarkable  valour  and  con- 
duct, expected  some  remuneration  from  the  emperor.  On  the 
contrary,  Theodosius  wasofiTended,  that  the  Barbarians,  whom  he 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  110 

had  so  much  honoured,  were  cut  off;  although  they  had  been  a 
great  annoyance  to  the  public  repose.  He  therefore  privately 
required  Gerontius  to  be  brought  before  him  in  custody,  to  plead 
in  defence  of  his  brave  achievements  for  the  advantage  of  the  Ro- 
mans. Upon  this  occasion,  Gerontius  charged  the  Barbarians  with 
rebellion,  and  related  the  depredations  and  ravages  they  had  com- 
mitted among  the  inhabitants  of  that  town.  The  emperor,  how- 
ever, continued  regardless  of  all  he  said,  and  persisted  in  accusing 
him  of  having  removed  them,  not  for  the  public  good,  but  in  order 
to  acquire  the  presents  which  the  emperor  had  given  them.  Ge- 
rontius replied,  that  he  had  sent  their  property  to  the  public  trea- 
sury after  their  death.  He  had  only  taken  from  them  some  golden 
necklaces  which  the  emperor  had  presented  to  them  as  ornaments. 
Notwithstanding  this  justification  he  had  greatdifficulty  in  escap- 
ing the  dangers  that  surrounded  him,  though  he  distributed  all  he 
possessed  to  the  eunuchs,  and  paid  a  porportionable  sum  for  his 
goodwill  to  the  Romans. 

While  affairs  thus  hastened  towards  ruin  under  the  reign  of 
Theodosius,  in  whose  time  no  virtuous  action  was  thought  com- 
mendable, but  every  species  of  luxury  and  licentiousness  in- 
creased daily  beyond  all  bounds,  an  insurrection  arose  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  great  city  of  Antioch  in  Syria,  who  were  un- 
able to  support  the  continual  addition  of  new  taxes  which  the 
collectors  invented.  Having  disgracfully  thrown  down  the  sta- 
tues of  the  emperor  and  empress,  they  used  expressions  corre- 
sponding with  their  actions,  which  were  mixed  with  humour  and 
that  species  of  raillery  to  which  they  accustom  themselves.  When 
the  emperor,  who  was  highly  incensed  at  these  actions,  threaten- 
ed to  punish  them  according  to  their  fault,  the  senate  of  the  city, 
dreading  his  resentment,  determined  to  send  ambassadors  to  ex- 
cuse the  actions  of  the  populace.  They  made  choice  of  the  phi- 
losopher Libanius,  whose  commendations  are  contained  in  the 
writings  which  he  has  left,  arid  of  Hilarius,  a  man  of  a  noble  fa- 
mily and  of  great  learning.  The  former  of  these  made  an  oration 
before  the  emperor  and  the  senate  concerning  the  insurrection. 
He  succeeded  in  appeasing  the  anger  which  the  emperor  had  felt 
against  the  Antiochians.  The  emperor,  being  now  perfectly  re- 
conciled to  that  city,  enjoined  him  to  make  a  second  oration  on 
that  subject;  and  appointed  Hiiarius,  who  was  renowned  for  his 
virtues,  governor  of  Palestine. 

Affairs  being  thus  situated  in  the  east,  in  Thrace,  and  in  Illyri- 
cum,Maximus,whodei  med  his  appointments  inferior  to  his  merits, 
being  only  governor  of  frhe  countries  formerly  under  Gratian,  pro- 


THE  HISTORY  HOOK 


jected  how  to  depose  the  young  Valenunian  t'roui  tut  empire,  if 
possible.  totally,  but  should  he  fail  in  the  whole,  to  sec  meat  least 
some  part.  Full  of  this  resolution,  he  prepared  to  cross  the  Alps 
into  Italy.  Perceiving,  however,  that  it  would  be  necessary  for 
him  to  pass  through  narrow  defiles,  and  over  craggy  and  pathless 
mountains,  and  beyond  these,  through  morasses  and  fens  which 
admit  of  no  passengers,  except  those  who  travel  very  slowly, 
much  less  of  so  considerable  an  army,  he  deferred  the  enter- 
prize  until  he  could  form  better  measures.  Valentinian,  however, 
sending  ambassadors  from  Aquileia  to  desire  a  continuance  of 
peace,  Maximus  complied  with  his  request,  and  pretended  to  be 
gratified  with  the  proposal.  Valentinian,  therefore,  sent  Domni- 
nus  to  treat,  who,  though  by  birth  a  Syrian,  was  a  steady  friend 
to  the  emperor.  As  he  was  next  to  the  emperor  in  autho- 
rity, he  seemed  likewise  to  excel  all  others  in  fidelity  and  expe- 
rience, and  whatever  private  measures  he  wished  to  adopt,  he  im- 
parted to  this  person  alone.  When  Domninus  arrived  with  Max- 
imus, and  had  informed  him  of  the  motive  of  the  embassy,  he  was 
received  with  the  utmost  kindness  and  respect.  Maximus  con- 
ferred on  him  so  great  honours,  and  so  many  presents,  that  Dom- 
ninus supposed  that  Valentinian  would  never  again  have  so  good 
a  friend.  To  such  a  degree  did  Maximus  succeed  in  deluding 
Domninus,  that  he  sent  along  with  him  part  of  his  own  army  to 
the  assistance  of  the  emperor  against  the  Barbarians,  who  dread- 
fully oppressed  the  Pannonians  under  his  dominion.  Domninus 
departed  from  him  highly  gratified  not  only  by  the  many  pre- 
sents be  had  received,  but  at  being  accompanied  by  those  were 
sent  with  him.  He  therefore  imprudently  by  crossing  the  Alps 
rendered  the  passage  more  practicable  to  Maximus.  That  he 
-would  do  this  had  been  foreseen  by  Maximus,  who  had  there- 
fore made  every  preparation,  and  followed  him  with  all  his  forces. 
lie  moreover  detached  guards  before  him,  to  prevent  the  passage 
of  any  that  way,  who  might  give  intelligence  to  the  Attendants  of 
Domninus,  that  Maximus  was  penetrating  into  Italy.  This  pre- 
caution had  its  full  success,  it  being  impossible  for  any  per- 
son to  pass  through  the  narrow  defile  of  the  mountains  without 
being  perceived.  Upon  learning  that  Domninus  and  his  retinue 
had  passed  the  defiles  of  the  Alps,  and  the  marshes  beyond  them, 
which  are  extremely  difficult  for  the  march  of  an  army,  not  fear- 
ing to  meet  any  enemy  in  those  devious  places,  he  immediately 
entered  Italy  without  resistance,  and  marched  to  Aquileia. 

This  so  much  surprised  Valentinian,  and  rendered  his  situation 
so  desperate,  that  his  courtiers  were  alarmed  lest  he  should  b§ 


BOOK  ir.  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


taken  by  Maximus  and  put  to  death.  He,  therefore,  immediately 
embarked,  and  sailed  (o  Thessalonica  with  his  mother  Justina,  who, 
as  I  before  mentioned,  had  been  the  wife  of  Magnentius,  but  after 
his  decease  was  taken  in  marriage  by  the  emperor  Valentinian  on 
account  of  her  extraordinary  beauty.  She  carried  along  with  her 
her  daughter  Galla.  After  having  passed  many  seas,  and  arriving 
at  Thessalonica,  they  sent  messengers  to  the  emperor  Theodosius, 
intreating  him  now  at  least  to  revenge  the  injuries  committed 
against  the  family  of  Valentinian.  He  was  astonished  at  hearing 
of  this,  and  began  "to  forget  his  extravagance,  and  to  lay  some  re- 
straint on  his  wild  inclination  for  pleasure.  Having  held  a  con- 
sultation, it  was  determined  that  he  with  part  of  the  senate  should 
proceed  to  Thessalonica.  This  journey  they  performed,  and 
there  again  consulted  what  measures  to  pursue.  It  was  at  length 
agreed,  with  the  unanimous  assent  of  the  assembly,  that  Maximus 
should  receive  the  punishment  due  to  his  offences.  Their  opinion 
was,  that  such  a  person  was  undeserving  of  life,  who  had  riot  only 
murdered  Gratian  and  usurped  his  dominions,  but  after  having 
succeeded  in  his  usurpation,  had  extended  his  progress,  and  also 
deprived  the  brother  of  Gratian  of  the  territory  which  had  been 
allotted  to  him.  Though  Theodosius  was  highly  incensed  at  these 
actions,  yet  his  natural  effeminacy,  and  the  negligent  habits  of 
his  former  life,  rendered  him  unwilling  to  undertake  a  war.  He 
therefore  pointed  out  to  them  the  inconveniences  which  unavoid- 
ably arise  from  civil  discord,  and  that  the  commonwealth  must  of 
necessity  receive  fatal  wounds  from  both  parties.  He  therefore 
stated  that  it  would  be  better  first  to  send  an  embassy,  and  that 
if  Maximus  would  surrender  the  empire  to  Valentinian  and  re- 
main at  peace,  the  empire  should  be  divided  between  them  all  as 
before,  but  if  he  should  yield  to  his  ambition,  they  would  imme- 
diately commence  a  war  against  him.  No  person  in  the  senate 
dared  to  speak  in  opposition  to  this,  because  it  appeared  to  be 
calculated  for  the  public  advantage. 

Meanwhile  Justina,  who  was  a  person  of  great  experience,  and 
knew  the  best  manner  of  conducting  her  affairs,  understanding 
that  Theodosius  was  naturally  inclined  to  love,  introduced  into 
his  presence  her  daughter  Galla,  who  was  extremely  beautiful. 
Then  embracing  the  knees  of  the  emperor,  she  supplicated  with 
great  humility  that  he  would  neither  suffer  the  death  of  Gratian 
to  pass  unrevenged,  to  whom  he  owed  the  empire,  nor  them  to 
remain  neglected  and  destitute  of  every  hope.  As  she  spoke  these 
words  she  shewed  him  her  daughter,  who  was  in  tears,  lamenting 
her  misfortunes.  When  Theodosius  had  listened  to  this  suppli- 

VOL.  I.    NO.  2.  Q  <%  *    - 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 


cation,  and  had  observed  the  beauty  of  Galla,  his  eyes  discovered 
the  wound  she  had  inflicted  on  his  heart.  Yet  he  deferred  that 
affair  to  a  future  occasion,  and  in  the  mean  time  gave  them  fa- 
vourable hopes.  Becoming  daily  more  inflamed  with  love  for 
Galla,  he  requested  Justina  to  grant  him  her  daughter,  since  his 
former  wife  Placilla  was  dead.  To  this  demand  she  replied,  that 
she  would  by  no  means  accede  to  it,  unless  he  would  make  war 
on  Maximus  to  avenge  the  death  of  Gratian.  Resolving,  there- 
fore, to  obtain  her  consent,  he  exerted  himself  in  preparing  for 
war.  Being  thus  incited  by  his  passion  for  Galla,  he  not  only  con- 
ciliated the  soldiers  by  augmenting  their  stipend,  but  was  roused 
from  his  negligence  in  other  aifairs,  resolving,  since  he  was  com- 
pelled by  necessity,  to  provide  for  affairs  that  would  require  at- 
tention after  his  departure.  For  this  purpose,  as  Cynegius,  the 
prefect  of  the  court,  had  died  on  his  journey  homeward  from 
Egypt,  he  considered  on  a  person  proper  to  succeed  in  that  office. 
After  having  examined  the  character  of  many  persons,  he  at 
length  found  one  suitable,  named  Tatianus,  for  whom  he  sent  to 
Aquileia.  Tatianus  had  held  other  offices  under  Valens,and  was 
in  every  respect  a  worthy  person.  Theodosius,  therefore,  declar- 
ed him  prefect  of  the  court,  sending  him  the  ensigns  of  magis- 
tracy, and  made  his  son  Proculus  praetor  of  the^city.  In  this  he 
truly  acted  with  wisdom,  in  committing  the  highest  offices  to 
such  worthy  men,  who  knew  how  to  make  the  most  judicious 
dispositions  for  the  advantage  of  the  subjects  in  the  absence  of 
the  emperor.  He  also  provided  for  the  army,  giving  the  com- 
mand of  the  horse  to  Promotus,  and  that  of  the  foot  to  Timasius. 
When  all  things  were  prepared  for  his  journey,  he  was  inform- 
ed that  the  Barbarians,  who  were  mixed  with  the  Roman  legions, 
had  been  solicited  by  Maximus  with  the  promise  of  great  rewards 
if  they  would  betray  the  army.  Upon  perceiving  that  the  design 
was  discovered,  they  fled  to  the  fens  and  marshes  of  Macedon, 
where  they  concealed  themselves  in  the  woods.  Being  pursued 
and  searched  for  with  great  diligence,  most  of  them  were  slain. 
The  emperor,  being  delivered  from  this  alarm,  marched  with, 
great  resolution  with  his  whole  army  against  Maximus.  He,  hoiv- 
ever,  first  placed  Justina  and  her  daughter  on  board  a  ship,  com- 
mitting them  to  the  care  of  persons  who  were  to  convey  them  in 
safety  to  Rome  ;  believing  that  the  Romans  wonld  receive  them 
with  great  pleasure,  because  they  were  disaffected  towards  Max- 
imus. He  intended  to  lead  his  army  through  the  Upper  Panna- 
nia  and  over  the  Appennine  mountains  to  Aquileia,  in  order  to 
surprise  the  enemy  before  they  were  prepared. 


HOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  133 

While  Theodosius  was  on  his  march,  Maximus,  having  learnt 
that  the  mother  of  Valentinian  and  her  children  were  to  cross  the 
Ionian  sea,  collected  a  number  of  swift-sailing  ships,  which  he 
sent  under  the  command  of  Andragathius  to  cruize  for  them. 
But  Andragathius,  though  he  sailed  about  in  every  direction, 
failed  of  his  purpose  ;  for  they  had  already  crossed  the  Ionian 
strait.  Collecting,  therefore,  a  competent  navy,  he  sailed  along 
all  the  adjacent  coasts,  in  expectation  that  Theodosius  would  at- 
tack hirn  with  his  navy. 

While  Andragathius  was  thus  employed,  Theodosius,  having 
passed  through  Pannonia  and  the  defiles  of  the  Appennines,  at- 
tacked unawares  the  forces  of  Maximus  before  they  were  pre- 
pared for  him.  A  part  of  his  army,  having  pursued  them  with  the 
utmost  speed,  forced  their  way  through  the  gates  of  Aquileia, 
the  guards  being  too  few  to  resist  them.  Maximus  was  torn 
from  his  imperial  throne  while  in  the  act  of  distributing  money 
to  his  soldiers,  and  being  stripped  of  his  imperial  robes,  was 
brought  to  Theodosius,  who,  having  in  reproach  enumerated  some 
of  his  crimes  against  the  commonwealth,  delivered  him  to  the 
common  executioner  to  receive  due  punishment. 

Such  was  the  end  of  Maximus  and  of  his  usurpation.  Having 
fraudulently  overcome  Valentinian,  he  imagined  that  he  should 
with  ease  subdue  the  whole  Roman  empire.  Theodosius,  having 
heard,  that  when  Maximus  came  from  beyond  the  Alps  he  left 
his  son  Victor,  whom  he  had  dignified  with  the  title  of  Caesar, 
he  immediately  sent  for  his  general,  named  Arbogastes,  who  de- 
prived the  youth  both  of  his  dignity  and  life.  When  this  intel- 
ligence reached  Andragathius,  who  was  then  cruizing  in  the 
Ionian  .sea,  it  excited  in  him  so  great  an  apprehension  of  the  in- 
numerable dangers  to  which  he  was  exposed,  that  he  did  not  wait 
the  arrival  of  his  enemies,  but  became  his  own  executioner.  He 
threw  himself  into  the  sea,  preferring  rather  to  trust  to  the  waves 
than  to  men  who  were  his  greatest  enemies. 
.  Theodosius  then  delivered  to  Valentinian  as  much  of  the  em- 
pire as  his  -father  had  possessed  ;  in  which  he  only  acted  as  he 
was  enjoined  by  his  duty  to  those  who  so  merited  his  kindness. 
Having  afterwards  embodied  the  choicest  soldiers  of  Maxirnus 
with  his  own,  he  sent  Valentinian  into  Italy,  Celtica,  and  other 
countries,  to  arrange  the  affairs  of  his  share  of  the  empire.  His 
mother  accompanied  him,  to  supply,  as  much  as  was  possible  in  a. 
woman,  the  prudence  which  his  youth  required. 

Returning  himself  to  Thessalonica,  he  found  the  affairs  of  Ma- 
eedon  in  the  utmost  confusion.  The  Barbarians,  who  had  secreted 


124  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv, 

thefnselves  in  the  fens  and  woods  near  the  lakes,  and  had  escaped 
from  the  former  incursion  of  the  Romans,  having  found  an  oppor* 
tunity  while  Theodosius  was  occupied  in  the  civil  war,  pillaged 
Macedon  and  Thessaly  without  opposition.  Upon  hearing  of  the 
late  victory,  and  that  the  emperor  was  upon  his  return,  they 
again  concealed  themselves  in  the  marshes,  and  issuing  privately 
from  thence  at  break  of  day,  carried  off  all  that  they  found,  and 
returned  to  their  usual  abode.  To  so  great  degree  did  they  ex* 
tend  these  ravages,  that  the  emperor  at  length  thought  them  to  b« 
rather  daemons  than  men.  Being  therefore  in  doubt,  he  commu- 
nicated his  design  to  no  person.  He  took  with  him  five  horse- 
men, each  of  whom  he  ordered  to  lead  three  or  four  horses,  that 
when  any  horse  became  weary,  the  rider  might  have  another 
to  mount,  and  the  horses  might  by  that  means  be  enabled  to  en- 
dure the  fatigue  of  the  enterprize  which  he  intended.  He  gave 
no  cause  to  suppose  that  he  was  the  emperor,  but  travelled  through 
the  country  as  a  private  individual.  When  he  or  his  retinue  was 
in  want  of  food,  they  procured  it  from  the  country  people.  He 
arrived  at  length  at  a  small  inn,  in  which  resided  an  old  woman, 
whotn  he  requested  to  admit  him  into  her  house,  and  to  give  him- 
some  wine.  She  complied  with  both  these  demands.  While  she 
was  entertaining  him  very  hospitably  with  wine  and  the  provi- 
sions which  were  then  accidentally  in  the  house,  the  night  ap- 
proached, and  he  therefore  desired  her  to  allow  him  to  sleep  there, 
to  which  she  likewise  consented.  In  the  room,  where  the  empe- 
ror lay,  he  perceived  a  man  who  remained  perfectly  silent,  and 
appeared  to  have  no  desire  to  be  known.  The  emperor,  being 
surprised  at  this  appearance,  called  the  old  woman,  and  demanded 
of  her  who  the  man  was  and  from  whence  he  came.  Her  reply 
was,  that  she  could  neither  give  him  that  information,  nor  where- 
fore he  came  there ;  all  she  knew  being,  that  since  the  emperor 
Theodosius  and  his  army  had  returned  home,  he  had  been  her 
guest  and  had  paid  her  every  day  for  his  entertainment;  that  he 
had  gone  out  every  morning,  walked  where  he  pleased,  and  re- 
turned at  night  as  from  some  hard  labour,  and  after  having  eaten 
something  had  lain  down  in  the  position  in  which  he  now  saw 
him.  The  emperor,  having  heard  the  story  of  the  woman,  judged 
it  convenient  to  make  a  further  inquiry  into  the  affair  ;  and  tak- 
ing hold  of  the  man,  commanded  him  to  declare  who  he  wa§. 
The  man  not  returning  any  answer,  he  beat  him  in  order  to  force 
him  to  confess.  But  the  man  continuing  unmoved  by  these  blows, 
he  commanded  the  horsemen  to  prick  him  with  their  swords, 
and  told  him  that  he  was  the  emperor  Theodosius.  He  then  con- 


BOOK  IT.  OF    ZOSIMTJS.  135 

fessed  that  he  was  a  spy  in  the  service  of  the  Barbarians  who 
were  concealed  in  the  fens,  and  informed  him  where  they  were, 
and  in  what  places  he  could  most  conveniently  attack  them.  The 
emperor  immediately  cut  off  his  head. 

After  this  joining  his  army,  which  was  encamped  at  no  great 
distance,  he  brought  his  forces  to  the  place  which  he  knew  to  be 
the  residence  of  the  Barbarians.      He  attacked  and  slew  them 
without  distinction  of  age,  dragging  some  out  of  the  fens  in  which 
they  were  concealed,  and  killing  others  in  the  water,  thus  causing 
a  great  slaughter  of  the  Barbarians.     Timasius,  the  commander, 
who  admired  the  valour  of  the  emperor,  now  desired  him  to  per* 
mit  the  soldiers,  who  by  this  time  were  exhausted  with  hunger 
and  unable  to  continue  to  toil  in  the  marshes,  to  refresh   them- 
selves.    To  this  the  emperor  assented,  and  the  trumpet  sounded 
a  retreat;  upon  which  the  soldiers  ceased  pursuing  the  Barbari- 
ans.    When  they  had  abundantly  satisfied  themselves  with  eating 
and  drinking,   they  were  so  overpowered  with  wine  and  fatigue 
that  they  fell  asleep.     This  being  observed  by  the  remaining  Bar- 
barians, they  seized  their  arms,  and  falling  on  the  soldiers,  who 
were  already  subdued  by  sleep  and  intoxication,  they  pierced  them 
with  their  spears  and  swords,  and  other  instruments  of  death. 
The  emperor  himself  with  his  whole  army  were  in  the  most  im-i 
minent  danger  of  death,  had  not  some,  who  had  not  yet  dined, 
hastened  to  the  tent  of  the  emperor,  and  informed  him  of  the  cir- 
cumstance.    The  emperor  and  those  who  were  with  him,  being 
considerably  alarmed,  resolved  to  avoid   the  impending  danger 
by  a  precipitate  flight.     But  being  met,  as  they  were  escaping,  by 
Promotus,  who  had  been  sent  for  by  the  emperor,  he  desired  the 
emperor  to  consult  his  own  safety  and  that  of  those  who  were  with 
him ;    as  he  himself  would  attend  to  the  Barbarians,  and  punish 
them  as  for  their  obstinacy  they  deserved.      He   had   no  sooner 
said  this,    than   he   hastened  to  the  Barbarians,  whom  he  found 
still  among  the  sleeping  soldiers,  and  slew  so  many  of  them,  that 
scarcely  any  of  them  escaped  with  safety  into  the  marshes. 

Such  were  the  most  remarkable  incidents  which  happened  to 
the  emperor  Theodosius  after  his  return  from  the  defeat  of 
Maximus.  When  he  again  arrived  at  Constantinople,  he  was 
elated  with  pride  for  his  victory  over  Max irmis,  but  was  so  much 
depressed  at  what  his  army  and  himself  had  suffered  from  the 
Barbarians  in  the  marshes,  that  he  resolved  to  bid  adiou  for  the 
future  to  ail  wars.  Committing,  therefore,  the  management  of 
those  affairs  to  Promotus,  he  began  to  resign  himself  to  his  for- 
mer mode  of  life,  and  delighted  in  splendid  banquets,  theatrical 


121 


THE  HISTORY  COOK  ir* 


spectacles,  horse-races,  and  voluptuousness.  These  opposite  fea- 
tures of  his  character  have  incited  in  me  a  degree  of  wonder* 
For  though  naturally  addicted  to  indolence  and  other  vices  which 
I  have  before  mentioned,  and,  therefore,  when  unmolested  by 
any  formidable  accident,  gaving  way  to  his  nature,  yet  ivhen 
roused  by  any  circumstance,  by  which  his  affairs  were  threatened 
with  danger,  he  laid  aside  his  languor,  and  relinquishing  his  plea- 
sures, prepared  himself  for  manly,  vigorous,  and  difficult  enter- 
prizes.  And  notwithstanding  he  was  so  resolute  as  by  experience 
\ve  are  informed,  yet,  when  free  from  anxiety,  he  would  again  be* 
come  the  slave  of  his  natural  vices  of  indolence  and  luxury. 

Of  the  magistrates  whom  he  had  appointed,  Rufinus  was  con- 
sidered the  chief,  who  was  by  birth  a  Celtic  Gaul,  and  com- 
manded the  court  guards.  Upon  him  the  emperor  reposed  the  en- 
tire confidence  of  all  his  affairs,  and  held  no  other  person  in  great 
estimation.  This  gave  offence  to  Timasius  and  Promotus,  whor 
after  having  subjected  themselves  to  so  many  dangers  for  the 
public  good,  were  placed  only  in  the  second  rank  of  favourites* 
And  Rufinus  was  by  this  rendered  so  haughty  and  assuming,  that 
in  a  public  assembly  he  uttered  some  very  strong  expreasions 
against  Promotus.  Promotus,  unable  to  endure  these,  struck 
Rufinus  in  the  face  with  great  violence  and  wounded  him.  On 
this  Rufinus  immediately  repaired  to  the  emperor,  and  shewing 
him  his  face,  excited  him  to  such  rage,  that  he  declared  if  their 
envy  against  Rufinus  should  not  diminish,  they  should 'very 
shortly  see  him  emperor.  Rufinus,  who  for  other  reasons  was  an 
enemy  to  many  other  persons,  through  his  excessive  ambition  of 
being  superior  to  all,  on  hearing  this,  persuaded  the  emperor  to 
send  Promotus  from  the  court  to  some  place  where  he  might 
exercise  the  soldiers.  Having  obtained  his  desire,  he  employed 
some  Barbarians  to  wait  in  ambuscade  as  he  was  entering  Thrace. 
These,  as  they  were  commanded,  attacked  him  by  surprize,  and 
killed  him.  He  was  a  man  superior  to  the  desire  of  wealth,  and 
had  behaved  with  sincerity  both  toward  the  commonwealth  and 
the  emperors;  but  was  justly  rewarded  for  his  folly  in  serving 
those  who  conducted  the  public  affairs  with  so  much  negligence 
and  impiety. 

When  this  action  was  rumoured  abroad,  and  had  become  the 
theme  of  general  conversation,  every  moderate  and  sober-minded 
person  was  displeased  at  such  enormities ;  yet  Rufinus,  at  the 
same  time,  as  if  in  reward  for  some  glorious  deed,  was  made 
consul.  Charges,  without  any  reasonable  foundation,  were  then 
alledged  against  Tatianus  and  his  son  Proculus,  who  had  given 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  125 

no  other  offence  to  Rufinus,  than  that  of  having  discharged  with- 
out bribery,  and  as  much  as  was  possible  according  to  their  duty, 
their  offices  of  prefect,  the  one  of  the  court,  and  the  other  of  the 
city.  To  effect  what  was  designed  against  them,  Tatianus,  being 
first  deprived  of  his  office,  was  brought  to  trial,  and  Rufinus  was 
appointed  prefect  of  the  imperial  court.  Although  there  were 
apparently  other  persons  commissioned  to  sit  as  judges  in  this 
process  besides  Rufinus,  yet  he  alone  had  authority  to  pronounce 
sentence.  When  Proculus  discovered  the  plot,  he  effected  his 
escape.  Upon  this  Rufinus,  who  thought  him  an  active  person, 
and  feared  lest  he  should  invent  some  mode  of  giving  him  un- 
easiness, went  to  his  father  Tatianus,  and  by  deceitful  oaths 
induced  him  to  believe  all  that  he  said.  He  even  persuaded 
the  emperor  to  give  both  the  father  and  son  the  most  favourable 
hopes  ;  until  he  had  thus  deluded  Tatianus  from  a  well-grounded 
suspicion  into  vain  thoughts  of  security,  and  induced  him  by  let- 
ters to  recall  his  son.  But  as  soon  as  Proculus  arrived,  he  was 
seized  and  thrown  into  prison.  Tatianus  being  sent  to  reside  in 
his  own  country,  they  sat  several  times  in  judgment  on  Proculus, 
until  at  length  the  judges,  as  they  had  agreed  with  Rufinus,  com- 
manded him  to  be  carried  into  the  suburbs,  called  Sycre,  and 
there  to  suffer  death.  The  emperor,  on  hearing  this,  sent  to  recall 
the  sword  from  his  throat ;  but  the  messenger  of  Rufinus  pro- 
ceeded so  slowly,  that  before  he  arrived  at  the  place,  the  head  of 
Proculus  was  severed  from  his  body. 

During  these  occurrences,  intelligence  was  brought  that  the 
emperor  Valentinian  was  no  more,  and  that  his  death  happened  in 
this  manner:  Arbogastes,  a  Frank,  who  was  appointed  by  the 
emperor  Gratian  lieutenant  to  Baudo,  at  the  death  of  Baudo, 
confiding  in  his  own  ability,  assumed  the  command  without  the 
emperor's  permission.  Being  thought  proper  for  the  station  by 
all  the  soldiers  under  him,  both  for  his  valour  and  experience  in 
military  affairs,  and  for  his  disregard  of  riches,  he  attained  great 
influence.  He  thus  became  so  elevated,  that  he  would  speak 
without  reserve  to  the  emperor,  and  would  blame  any  measure 
which  he  thought  improper.  This  gave  such  umbrage  to  Valen- 
tinian, that  he  opposed  him  on  several  occasions,  and  would  have 
done  him  injury  had  he  known  how  to  effect  it.  At  length  Va- 
lentinian, no  longer  able  to  submit  to  his  correction,  when  Arbo- 
gastes was  approaching  him  as  he  sat  on  the  imperial  throne, 
Jooked  sternly  upon  him,  and  presented  him  with  a  writing,  by 
which  he  dismissed  him  from  his  command.  Arbogastes,  having 
jread  it,  replied,  "  You  neither  gave  me  the  command,  nor  can 


126  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  iv. 


deprive  me  of  it;*'  and  having  said  this,  tore  the  writing  to 
pieces,  threw  it  down,  and  retired.  From  that  period  their 
hatred  was  no  longer  kept  to  themselves,  but  appeared  in  public. 
Valentiuian  sent  frequent  letters  to  the  emperor  Theodosius,  ac- 
quainting him  with  the  arrogant  behaviour  of  Arbogastes  towards 
the  majesty  of  an  emperor,  and  requesting  him  speedily  to  send 
assistance,  or  that  he  should  suddenly  make  him  a  visit.  Mean- 
time Arbogastes,  hesitating  how  to  proceed,  at  length  formed 
the  following  resolution: 

There  was  in  the  court  a  person  named  Eugenius,  a  man  of  learn- 
ing, who  was  a  professor  and  teacher  of  rhetoric.  He  had  been 
recommended  to  the  notice  of  Arbogastes  by  Rictomeris  as  a  per- 
son of  a  kind  and  obliging  disposition,  with  a  desire  that  he  would 
make  him  his  familiar  friend,  being  one  who  would  be  serviceable 
to  him  in  any  circumstances  where  the  assistance  of  a  real  friend 
would  be  needful.  When  Rictomeris  was  departed  to  the  empe- 
ror Theodosius,  by  daily  conversation  Eugenius  became  the  sin- 
cere friend  of  Arbogastes,  who  had  no  secret  which  he  did  »not 
confide  to  him.  Recollecting  Eugenius,  therefore,  at  this  junc- 
ture, who  by  his  extraordinary  learning  and  the  gravity  of  his 
conversation  seemed  well  adapted  for  the  management  of  an  em- 
pire, he  communicated  to  him  his  designs.  But  finding  him  not 
pleased  with  the  proposals,  he  attempted  to  prevail  on  him  by  all 
the  arts  he  could  use,  and  entreated  him  not  to  reject  what  for- 
tune so  favourably  offered.  Having  at  length  persuaded  him,  he 
deemed  it  advisable  in  the  first  place  to  remove  Valentinian,  and 
thus  to  deliver  the  sole  authority  to  Eugenius.  With  this  view 
he  proceeded  to  Vienna,  a  town  in  Gaul,  where  the  emperor  re- 
sided ;  and  as  he  was  amusing  himself  near  the  town  in  some 
sports  with  the  soldiers,  apprehending  no  danger,  Arbogastes 
gave  him  a  mortal  wound.  To  this  audacious  action  the  soldiers 
quietly  submitted,  not  only  because  he  was  so  brave  and  warlike 
a  person,  but  because  they  were  attached  to  him  through  his  con- 
tempt of  riches.  As  soon  as  he  had  performed  this  action,  he  de- 
clared Eugenius  emperor,  and  infused  into  them  the  most  favour- 
able hopes  that  he  would  prove  an  excellent  ruler,  since  he  pos- 
sessed such  extraordinary  qualifications. 

When  these  events  were  related  to  Theodosius,  his  wife  Galla 
filled  the  whole  court  with  confusion  by  her  lamentations  for  the 
death  of  her  brother.  The  emperor  likewise  was  overcome  by 
grief  and  anxiety,  having  not  only  lost  his  associate  in  the  empire, 
who  was  a  young  man  and  so  nearly  related  to  him,  but  the  em- 
pire having  fallen  into  the  hands  of  men  disaffected  to  himself,  and 


&OOK  iv.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  127 

likewise  invincible ;  Arbogastes  being  brave  and  skilful,  and  Eu- 
genius  learned  and  virtuous.  Although  he  made  these  reflections 
and  frequently  revolved  them  in  his  mind,  yet  he  resolved  at 
once  as  it  were  to  throw  the  die  for  all  that  he  possessed,  and 
therefore  made  every  preparation  for  war.  In  pursuance  of  his 
design  he  intended  to  make  Rictomeris  commander  of  the  cavalry, 
having  experienced  his  courage  in  many  wars,  and  to  appoint 
other  officers  over  the  legions.  But  Rictomeris  dying  of  disease 
he  was  compelled  to  make  a  different  choice.  While  the  em- 
peror was  deliberating  on  this,  an  embassy  arrived  from  Eugenius, 
to  learn  from  the  emperor  Theodosius  whether  he  would  acknow- 
ledge the  title  of  Eugenius,  or  declare  his  election  void.  The 
person  sent  on  this  embassy  was  Rufinus,  an  Athenian,  who 
neither  brought  letters  from  Arbogastes,  nor  made  any  mention, 
of  him.  While  Theodosius  deferred  the  time  in  order  to  consult 
on  the  answer  to  this  mission,  another  occurrence  intervened. 
When  Theodosius  was  first  made  emperor,  he  admitted  to  his 
friendship  and  alliance  some  Barbarians,  whom  he  attached  botrf 
with  promises  and  large  presents,  nor  did  he  fail  by  all  civilities 
to  endeavour  to  acquire  the  regard  of  the  officers  of  each  nation, 
but  admitted  them  even  to  his  own  table.  Amongst  these  arose 
a  debate,  in  which  two  different  opinions  were  maintained. 
Some  of  them  declared,  that  it  was  better  to  break  the  oaths  they 
had  taken  when  they  entered  into  the  service  of  the  Romans  ; 
while  others  on  the  contrary  maintained,  that  they  ought  not  on 
any  consideration  to  act  in  opposition  to  their  own  agreements. 
The  person  who  wished  to  trample  on  his  engagements,  and  per- 
suaded his  countrymen  to  the  same,  was  Priulfus ;  and  on  the 
other  side  Fraustius  maintained  that  they  ought  to  observe  what 
they  had  sworn.  A  considerable  time  elapsed  before  it  was  known 
that  such  a  controversy  existed  among  them,  until  on  one  occa- 
sion when  they  were  at  the  emperor's  table,  and  had  drunk  more 
than  usual,  they  quarrelled  with  each  other,  and  declared  their 
sentiments.  The  emperor,  therefore,  when  he  had  discovered  the 
opinion  of  each  individual,  put  an  end  to  the  entertainment.  As 
they  left  the  palace,  they  became  so  warm,  that  Fraustius,  unable 
any  longer  to  contain  his  rage,  drew  his  sword,  and  killed  Priulfus. 
As  his  soldiers  would  have  fallen  upon  Fraustius,  the  guards  of  the 
emperor  interposed,  and  prevented  the  tumult  from  proceeding 
farther;  although  when  the  emperor  heard  of  it,  he  was  regard- 
less of  what  had  been  done,  and  suffered  them  to  kill  each  other 
as  they  pleased.  In  the  mean  time,  having  deluded  the  ambas- 
sadors with  presents  and  fair  words,  he  sent  them  home,  and  as 
VOL.  I.  NO.  2.  R 


THE  HISTORY  «OOK  iv. 


soon  as  they  were  departed,   continued  his  preparations  for  war. 
Conceiving  the  principal  object,  as  it  really  is,  to  be  the  choice  of 
commanders,   he  gave  the  command  of  the  Roman  army  to  Ti- 
masius,   and  next  to  him  to  Stilico,  who  had  married  Serena,  the 
niece  of  Theodosius.     The  Barbarian  allies  he  placed  under  the 
conduct  of  Gaines  and  Saulus,  with  whom  Bacurius  was  likewise 
joined    in  commission,  who  was  of  Armenian  extraction,  a  man 
expert  in  military  affairs,  and  devoid  of  evil  inclinations.    Having 
thus  made  choice  of  his  principal  officers,  he  was  hastening  to 
march,  when  his  wife  Galla  was  delivered  of  an  infant,  but  was 
no  sooner  eased  of  her  burden  than  deprived  of  life.     The  empe- 
ror  (having  mourned  for  her  a  whole  day,  according  to  the  rule 
of  Homer),  proceeded  with  his  army  to  the  war,  leaving  behind 
him  his  son  Arcadius,  who  had  some  time  previously  been  made 
emperor.   This  prince  being  young,  his  father,  in  order  to  amend 
the  defects  of  his  nonage,  left  with  him  Rufinus,  who  was  prefect 
of  the  court,  and  acted  as  he  pleased,  even  as  much  as  the  power 
of  sovereignty  enabled  the  emperor  himself  to  do.      Having  done 
this,  he  took  with  him  his  younger  son  Honorius,  quickly  passed 
through  the  intermediate  countries,  and  having  exceded  his  ex- 
pectations in  crossing  the  Alps,  arrived  where  the  enemy  was  sta- 
tioned ;  Eugenins  being  astonished  at  seeing  him  there  whom  he 
so  little  expected.  But  as  he  was  arrived  there,  and  consequently 
•was  under  the  necessity  of  engaging,  he  judged  it  most  prudent  to 
place  the  Barbarian  troops  in  front,  and  to  expose  them  first.    He 
ordered   Gaines   with  the  troops  under  his  command  to  make 
the  first  attack,  and  the  other  commanders  of  Barbarian  soldiers 
to  follow  him,  either  cavalry,  horse  archers,  or  infantry.  Eugenius 
then  drew  out  his  forces.     When  the  two  armies  were  engaged, 
so  great  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.  happened,  that  for  more  than  half 
the  time  of  the  action  it  appeared  rather  to  be  night  than  day.  As 
they  fought  therefore  a  kind  of  nocturnal  battle,  so  great  a  slaugh- 
ter was  made,  that  in  the  same  day  the  greater  part  of  the  allies 
of  Theodosius  were  slain,  with  their  commander  Bacurius,   who 
fought  very  courageously  at  their  head,  while  the  other  command- 
ers escaped  very  narrowly  with  the  remainder.     When  night 
came  on  and  the  armies  had  raUied,  Eugenius  was  so  elated  with 
his  victory,  that  he  distributed  money  among  those  who  had  be- 
haved with  the  greatest  gallantry  in  the  battle,  and  gave  them 
time  to  refresh  themselves,  as  if  after  such  a  defeat  there  was  no 
probability  of  another  engagement.    As  they  were  thus  solacing 
themselves,  the  emperor  Theodosius  about  break  of  day  fell  sud- 
denly on  them  with  his  whole  forces,  while  they  were  still  reclined 


BOOK  iv.  OF  ZOS1MUS  129 

on  the  ground,  and  killed  them  before  they  knew  of  the  approach 
of  an  enemy.  He  then  proceeded  to  the  tent  of  Eugenius,  where 
he  attacked  those  who  were  around  him,  killing  many  of  them, 
and  taking  some  of  them  in  their  flight,  among  whom  was  Eu- 
genius. When  they  had  got  him  in  their  power,  they  cut  off  his 
head,  and  carried  it  on  a  long  spear  around  the  camp,  in  order  to 
shew  those  who  still  adhered  to  him,  that  it  was  now  their  in- 
teres  to  be  reconciled  to  the  emperor,  inasmuch  as  the  usurper 
was  removed.  All  who  had  survived  the  engagement  imme- 
diately came  over  to  the  emperor,  hailing  him  with  the  appel- 
lation of  Augustus,  and  entreating  him  to  pardon  their  offences  ; 
to  which  the  emperor  readily  consented.  Arbogastes,  who  had 
no  inclination  to  make  experiment  of  the  emperors  clemency, 
took  refuge  in  the  most  craggy  mountains.  Perceiving  there 
that  a  general  search  was  making  for  him,  he  stabbed  himself, 
preferring  a  voluntary  death  to  being  taken  by  the  enemy. 

The  emperor  Theodosius  after  these  successes  proceeded  to 
Rome,  where  he  declared  his  son  Honorius  emperor,  and  ap- 
pointing Stilico  to  the  command  of  his  forces  there,  left  him  as 
guardian  to  his  son.  Before  his  departure,  he  convened  the 
senate,  who  firmly  adhered  to  the  ancient  rites  and  customs  of 
their  country,  and  could  not  be  induced  to  join  with  those  who 
were  inclined  to  contempt  for  the  gods.  In  an  oration  he  ex- 
horted them  to  relinquish  their  former  errors,  as  he  termed 
them,  and  to  embrace  the  Christian  faith,  which  promises  abso- 
lution from  all  sins  and  impieties.  But  not  a  single  individual  of 
them  would  be  persuaded  to  this,  nor  recede  from  the  ancient 
ceremonies,  which  had  been  handed  down  to  them  from  the 
building  of  their  city,  and  prefer  to  them  an  irrational  assent ; 
having,  as  they  said,  lived  in  the  observance  of  them  almost 
twelve  hundred  years,  in  the  whole  space  of  which  their  city  had 
never  been  conquered,  and,  therefore,  should  they  change  them 
for  others,  they  could  not  foresee  what  might  ensue.  Theodo- 
sius, therefore,  told  them,  that  the  treasury  was  too  much  ex- 
hausted by  the  expence  of  sacred  rites  and  sacrifices,  and  that  he 
should,  therefore,  abolish  them,  since  he  neither  thought  them 
commendable,  nor  could  the  exigencies  of  the  army  spare  so 
much  money.  The  senate  in  reply  observed,  that  the  sacrifices 
were  not  duly  performed,  unless  the  charges  were  defrayed  from 
the  public  funds.  Yet  thus  the  laws  for  the  performance  of  sacred 
rites  and  sacrifices  were  repealed  and  abolished,  besides  other  in- 
stitutions and  ceremonies,  which  had  been  received  from  their 
ancestors.  By  these  means,  the  Roman  empire,  having  been  ' 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v, 


devastated  by  degrees,  is  become  the  habitation  of  Barbarians,  or 
rather  having  lost  all  its  inhabitants,  is  reduced  to  such  a  form, 
that  no  person  can  distinguish  where  its  cities  formerly  stood. 
That  affairs  were  thus  brought  into  so  melancholy  a  state  will  be 
evident  from  a  particular  narrative  of  them.  The  emperor  Theo- 
dosius,  having  consigned  Italy,  Spain,  Celtica,  and  Libya  to  his 
son  Honorius,  died  of  a  disease  on  his  journey  towards  Constan- 
tinople. His  body  was  embalmed,  and  deposited  in  the  imperial 
sepulchres  of  that  city. 


FIFTH  BOOK. 


THE  whole  empire  being  vested  in  Arcadius  and  Honorius, 
they  indeed  appeared  by  their  title  to  possess  the  sovereign  au- 
thority, although  the  universal  administration  of  affairs  was  under 
Rufinus  in  the  east,  and  under  Stilico  in  the  west  By  these  all 
causes  were  determined,  at  their  own  pleasure ;  for  whoever 
bribed  plentifully,  or  by  any  other  means  of  friendship  or  con- 
sanguinity could  make  the  judge  his  advocate,  was  sure  to  suc- 
ceed in  the  process.  From  hence  it  happened  that  most  of  those 
great  estates,  which  cause  the  possessors  to  be  generally  esteemed 
fortunate,  devolved  to  these  two;  since  some  endeavoured  by 
gifts  to  avoid  false  accusations,  and  others  relinquished  all  their 
possessions  to  obtain  an  office,  or  in  any  other  manner  to  pur- 
chase the  ruin  of  particular  cities.  While  iniquity  of  every  kind 
presided,  therefore,  in  the  respective  cities,  the  money  from  all 
quarters  flowed  into  the  coffers  of  Rufinus  and  Stilico ;  while  on 
the  reverse,  poverty  preyed  on  the  habitations  of  those  who  had 
formerly  been  rich.  Nor  were  the  emperors  acquainted  with 
any  thing  that  was  done,  but  thought  all  that  Rufinus  and  Stilico 
commanded  was  done  by  virtue  of  some  unwritten  law.  After 
they  had  amassed  immense  wealth,  Rufinus  began  to  concert  the 
means  of  becoming  emperor,  by  making  his  own  daughter,  who 
was  now  marriageable,  the  wife  of  the  emperor ;  for  by  that  he 
conceived  he  should  possess  a  plausible  argument  in  favour  of 
his  pretensions  to  government.  With  this  intent  he  privately 
intimated  the  affair  by  means  of  some  of  the  emperor's  attend- 
ants, supposing  that  no  one  perceived  his  aim,  although  the  re- 
port of  it  was  circulated  through  the  whole  city.  For  all  persons 
conjectured  his  intention  by  his  pride  and  arrogance,  which  in- 
creased so  much  every  day,  that  the  general  hatred  against  him 
was  augmented.  Notwithstanding  this,  as  if  he  proposed  to  dis- 


BOOK  T.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  131 

guise  small  faults  with  greater  enormities,  he  had  the  audacity  to 
be  guilty  of  another  atrocity.  , 

Florentius,  who,  when  the  great  Julian  was  Caesar,  had  been 
prefect  of  the  court  in  the  countries  beyond  the  Alps,  had  a  son 
named  Lucianus,  who  had  used  the  patronage  of  Rufinus,  and 
had  given  him  the  best  part  of  his  estate.  For  this  reason  Ru- 
fmus  professed  on  every  occasion  great  kindness  for  the  young 
man,  and  was  continually  speaking  in  his  commendation  to  the 
emperor  Arcadius,  who  made  him  count  of  the  east,  a  dignity 
which  authorizes  every  one  on  whom  it  is  conferred  to  superin- 
tend the  conduct  of  all  the  prefects  of  provinces  through  the 
east,  and  to  correct  whatever  is  improperly  done.  Lucianus,  ex- 
hibiting toward  those  under  his  authority  all  the  virtue  that  be- 
comes a  governor,  was  celebrated  for  his  justice,  temperance,  and 
all  other  endowments  which  adorn  a  worthy  magistrate ;  neither 
having  respect  of  persons,  or  any  other  thoughts  than  such  as 
were  suggested  to  him  by  the  laws.  From  this  cause,  when  Eu- 
cherius,  the  emperor's  uncle,  desired  him  to  perform  an  action 
not  proper  for  him  to  comply  with,  he  repulsed  him,  and  by  that 
exasperated  him  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  calumniated  him  to  the 
emperor.  The  emperor  observing  that  Rufinus  was  the  occa- 
sion of  it,  by  having  conferred  so  much  power  to  such  a  person ; 
Rufinus,  as  if  in  resentment  for  the  blame  laid  to  his  charge  by 
the  emperor,  without  communicating  his  design  to  any  person, 
proceeded  with  a  very  small  retinue  to  Antioch.  Having  entered 
that  city  at  midnight,  he  seized  on  Lucianus,  and  brought  him  to 
trial  without  any  accusation.  He  afterwards  commanded  him  to 
be  beaten  on  the  neck  with  leaden  balls  until  he  expired.  Rufinus 
then  caused  him  to  be  carried  in  a  litter,  closely  covered,  to  cause 
the  people  to  suppose  that  he  was  not  yet  dead,  and  that  he  should 
receive  some  act  of  humanity.  The  city  was  so  much  disgusted 
by  this  unusual  manner  of  proceeding,  that  he  was  compelled  to 
conciliate  the  people  by  erecting  a  portico,  which  exceeds  in  ele- 
gance every  structure  in  the  city.  When  he  had  effected  this,  he 
returned  to  Constantinople,  where  he  exerted  himself  in  order  to 
procure  an  affinity  with  the  emperor.  But  fortune  ordered  the 
affair  in  a  different  mannner,  and  the  expectation  of  Rufinus  was 
frustrated  by  these  means.  Promotus  had  two  sons,  who  while 
Theodosius  was  living  were  brought  up  with  his  children.  One- 
of  these  had  in  his  house  a  young  lady  of  remarkable  beauty, 
whom  the  emperor  was  advised  by  Eutropius,  one  of  his  eunuchs, 
to  make  his  wife,  with  great  commendations  of  her  beauty.  Per- 
ceiving that  the  emperor  listened  to  what  he  said  with  some 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  r. 


satisfaction,  he  shewed  him  her  picture,  by  which  he  inflamed 
Arcadius  with  so  violent  a  passion  for  the  lady,  that  he  at  length 
persuaded  him  to  a  resolution  to  marry  her,  while  Rufinus  in  the 
mean  time  was  ignorant  of  the  circumstance,  and  expected  that 
his  own  daughter  would  shortly  be  empress,  and  that  he  himself 
should  be  an  associate  in  the  empire.  The  eunuch,  as  soon  as  he 
perceived  that  his  design  was  effected,  commanded  the  people  to 
dance  with  garlands  in  their  hands,  as  they  were  accustomed  to 
do  on  the  wedding-day  of  an  emperor.  Having  procured  from  the 
palace  an  imperial  robe  and  other  attire  proper  for  an  empress, 
which  he  gave  to  the  servants  of  the  emperor  to  carry,  he  pro- 
ceeded through  the  city  attended  by  the  populace.  They  all 
supposed  that  those  ornaments  were  to  be  presented  to  the 
daughter  of  Rufinus,  and  ran  along  with  those  that  carried  them, 
yet  on  arriving  at  the  house  of  Pfomotus,  they  entered  it  with. 
the  presents,  and  delivered  them  to  the  young  lady,  who  resided 
there  with  the  son  of  Prornotus.  It  thus  became  manifest  who 
was  chosen  to  become  the  emperor's  wife.  The  hopes  of  Rufinus 
being  thus  rendered  abortive,  on  seeing  another  woman  made 
empress,  he  employed  himself  in  inventing  a  method  to  re- 
move Eutropius. 

Thus  were  affairs  situated  in  that  part  of  the  empire  which  was 
under  the  government  of  Arcadius,  while  Stilico,  who  was  governor 
of  the  western  empire,  gave  his  daughter  by  Serena  in  marriage 
to  the  emperor  Honorius.  Serena  was  the  daughter  of  Honorius, 
brother  to  Theodosius,  the  father  of  the  two  emperors.  Stilico, 
by  this  alliance  with  the  emperor,  strengthened  his  authority, 
having  likewise  almost  the  whole  Roman  army  under  his  com- 
mand. For  Theodosius  having  died  in  Italy  after  having  cut  off 
Eugenius,  Stilico  was  commander  of  the  whole  army,  out  of 
which  he  selected  the  strongest  and  most  courageous  soldiers, 
whom  he  retained  with  himself,  sending  the  most  feeble  part  and 
the  refuse  of  it  into  the  east.  After  having  done  this,  being  much 
incensed  against  Rufinus,  who  desired  to  be  invested  in  the  east 
with  power  to  balance  his  in  the  west,  he  resolved  to  go  to  Arca- 
dius, wishing  to  obtain  the  disposal  of  all  his  affairs  likewise  at 
his  own  will  and  pleasure.  He  asserted,  that  when  Theodo- 
sius was  on  his  death-bed,  he  gave  him  a  special  charge  to  take 
care  of  the  affairs  of  both  emperors.  When  Rufinus  understood 
this,  he  endeavoured  by  all  the  art  in  his  power  to  prevent  the  ex- 
pedition of  Stilico  into  the  east,  and  likewise  to  disperse  and 
weaken  the  military  force  of  Arcadius.  Indeed,  while  he  was 
projecting  these  schemes,  he  found  men  for  his  purpose  more 


BOOK  v,  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


wicked  than  he  desired,  by  whose  aid  he  occasioned  great  cala- 
mities to  the  Romans.  In  what  manner  I  am  about  to  relate. 

Musonius,  a  Greek,  had  three  sons,  who  were  named  Musonius, 
Antiochus,  and  Axiochus.  Of  these  Musonius  and  Axiochus  en- 
deavoured to  excel  their  father,  both  in  learning-  and  integrity. 
But  Antiochus  adopted  a  contrary  course,  accustoming  himself  to 
nothing  but  wickedness.  Rufinus,  finding  him  adapted  to  his 
purpose,  made  him  proconsul  of  Greece,  because  he  wished  that 
the  Barbarians,  when  they  made  inroads,  should  find  but  little 
trouble  in  laying  it  waste ,  and  committed  the  garrison  at  Ther- 
mopylae to  the  care  of  Gerontius,  who  would  be  serviceable  in 
all  his  designs  against  the  commonwealth.  When  Rufinus  had 
concerted  these  infamous  devices,  he  discovered  that  Alaric  be- 
came seditious  and  disobedient  to  the  laws,  for  he  was  displeased 
that  he  was  not  entrusted  with  the  command  of  some  other  mili- 
tary forces  besides  the  Barbarians,  which  Theodosius  had  allotted 
to  him  when  he  assisted  in  the  deposition  of  the  usurper  Bug-e- 
mus. Rufinus,  therefore,  privately  communicated  with  him, 
prompting  him  to  lead  forth  his  Barbarians,  and  auxiliaries  of 
any  other  nation,  as  he  might  with  ease  render  himself  master  of 
the  whole  country.  Alaric  on  this  marched  out  of  Thrace  into 
Macedon  and  Thessaly,  committing  the  greatest  devastations  on 
his  way.  Upon  approaching  Thermopylae,  he  privately  sent 
messengers  to  Antiochus  the  proconsul,  and  to  Gerontius  the  go- 
vernor of  the  garrison  at  Thermopylae,  to  inform  them  of  his  ap- 
proach. This  news  was  no  sooner  communicated  to  Gerontius  than 
he  and  the  garrison  retired  and  left  the  Barbarians  a  free  passage 
into  Greece.  Upon  arriving  there,  they  immediately  began  to  pillage 
the  country  and  to  sack  all  the  towns,  killing  all  the  men,  both 
young  and  old,  and  carrying  off  the  women  and  children,  together 
.with  the  money.  In  this  incursion,  all  Boeotia,  and  whatever 
countries  of  Greece  the  Barbarians  passed  through  after  their  en- 
trance at  Thermopylae,  were  so  ravaged,  that  the  traces  are  visible 
to  the  present  day.  Thebes  only  was  excepted,  being  preserved 
partly  by  its  own  strength,  and  partly  by  the  impatience  of  Alaric 
to  proceed  to  Athens,  which  prevented  him  from  besieging  this 
city.  The  Thebans  having  thus  escaped,  he  advanced  to  Athens, 
expecting  to  take  that  city  with  ease,  since  by  reason  of  its  mag- 
nitude it  could  not  easily  be  defended  ;  nor  being  contiguous  to 
the  Pyraeus  could  it  hold  out  long  before  it  would  be  compelled 
to  surrender. 

Such  was  the  hope  of  Alaric.  But  the  antiquity  of  the  city,  in 
the  midst  of  these  impious  designs,  was  able  to  call  to  its  aid 


1S4  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 

the  presiding  deities  by  which  it  was  preserved.  It  is,  there- 
fore, worthy  of  the  pains  to  describe  the  cause  to  which  the 
city  owed  its  preservation  ;  it  being  divine  and  supernatural, 
and  calculated  to  excite  devotion  in  all  who  hear  it.  When 
Alaric  advanced  with  all  his  forces  against  the  city,  he  saw  Mi- 
nerva, its  tutelar  goddess,  walking  along  the  wall,  in  the  same 
form  in  which  she  is  represented  among  the  statues  of  the  gods, 
which  is  in  armour  ready  to  attack  those  who  oppose  her.  Be- 
fore the  walls  he  saw  Achilles  standing  in  an  heroic  posture, 
such  as  that  in  which  Homer  represents  him  engaging  the  Tro- 
jans so  furiously  in  revenge  for  the  death  of  Patroclus.  Alaric, 
being  struck  with  awe  by  this  sight,  desisted  from  his  attempt  on 
the  city,  and  sent  heralds  with  proposals  for  peace.  These  being 
accepted,  and  oaths  mutually  exchanged,  Alaric  entered  Athens 
with  a  small  number  of  troops.  He  was  there  entertained  with 
all  possible  civility,  and  treated  with  great  hospitality ;  after 
which  he  received  some  presents,  and  departed,  leaving  the  city 
and  all  Attica  uninjured.  Thus  Athens,  which  was  the  only 
place  that  was  preserved  from  the  earthquake  which  happened 
under  the  reign  of  Valens,  and  shook  the  whole  of  Greece,  as  I 
mentioned  in  the  preceding  book,  escaped  also  from  this  extreme 
danger. 

Alaric,  therefore,  through  the  dread  of  the  apparitions  he  had 
seen,  left  all  Attica  uninjured,  and  proceeded  to  Megaris,  which 
he  took  at  the  first  attempt.  From  hence,  meeting  with  no  re- 
sistance, he  proceeded  towards  the  Peloponnesus.  Gerontius 
thus  allowed  him  to  pass  over  the  isthmus,  beyond  which  all 
the  towns,  being  unfortified  and  confiding  in  the  security  which 
they  derived  from  the  isthmus,  were  capable  of  being  taken  with- 
out the  trouble  of  fighting.  For  this  reason  Corinth  was  first  as- 
saulted and  immediately  taken,  with  the  small  towns  in  its  neigh- 
bourhood, and  afterwards  Argos,  with  all  the  places  between  that 
and  Lacedaemon.  Even  Sparta  shared  in  the  common  captivity 
of  Greece,  being  no  longer  fortified  with  warlike  defenders,  but 
through  the  avarice  of  the  Romans  exposed  to  treacherous  ma- 
gistrates, who  readily  assented  to  the  corrupt  inclinations  of  their 
governor  in  all  that  was  conducive  to  public  ruin. 

Rufinus,  on  learning  the  calamities  which  Greece  had  sustained, 
was  still  more  anxious  to  be  emperor ;  for  now  that  the  common- 
wealth was  in  confusion,  there  appeared  to  him  no  obstacle  to 
such  an  enterprize.  Stilico,  having  caused  a  considerable  number 
of  troops  to  embark,  hastened  to  assist  the  Achaians  in  their  dis- 
tress. Arriving  in  the  Peloponnesus,  he  compelled  the  Barba- 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  137 

rians  to  fly  to  Pholoe,  where  he  might  with  ease  have  destroyed 
them  all,  through  the  want  of  provisions,  had  he  not  yielded  him- 
self up  to  luxury  and  licentiousness.  He  likewise  permitted  his 
soldiers  to  plunder  what  the  Barbarians  had  left;  thus  giving  the 
enemy  an  opportunity  to  depart  from  Peloponnesus,  to  carry 
their  spoils  with  them  to  Epirus,  and  to  pillage  all  the  towns  in 
that  country.  When  Stilico  heard  of  these  transactions,  he  sailed 
back  into  Italy  without  having  effected  any  thing,  except  bring- 
ing on  the  Greeks  much  greater  and  more  grievous  calamities  by 
means  of  the  soldiers  whom  he  had  taken  with  him. 

Upon  his  return  into  Italy,  he  immediately  resolved  to  effect 
the  death  of  Rufinus,  in  the  following  manner:  He  informed  the 
emperor  Honorius  that  he  might  conveniently  send  some  auxiliary 
legions  to  his  brother  Arcadius,  to  defend  the  miserable  nations 
under  his  dominion.  The  emperor  commanding  him  to  act  as  he 
judged  expedient,  he  gave  orders  what  troops  should  be  sent  upon 
that  occasion,  appointing  Gaines  their  commander,  to  whom  he 
communicated  his  design  against  Rufinus.  When  these  troops 
were  arrived  near  Constantinople,  Gaines  went  forward,  and  in- 
formed the  emperor  Arcadius  of  their  approach,  and  that  they 
were  come  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  him  in  his  necessity. 
The  emperor  being  pleased  at  their  coming,  Gaines  advised  him 
to  meet  them  on  their  entrance  into  the  city,  which  he  observed 
was  an  honour  usually  conferred  on  the  soldiers  in  similar  in- 
stances. The  emperor,  being  persuaded  to  this,  went  out  of  the 
city,  and  the  soldiers  paid  him  the  usual  marks  of  respect,  which 
he  received  with  kindness.  At  length,  the  signal  being  made  by 
Gaines,  they  all  fell  on  Rufinus,  and  surrounding  him  struck  him 
with  their  swords,  so  that  one  struck  off  his  right  hand,  another  his 
left,  a  third  divided  his  head  from  his  body,  and  went  away 
singing  songs  of  triumph.  They  even  so  insulted  him  after  he 
was  dead,  as  to  carry  his  head  round  the  whole  city,  asking  every 
person  they  met  to  give  something  to  an  insatiable  miser. 

Thus  Rufinus,  who  occasioned  many  intolerable  calamities  to 
private  individuals,  and  was  the  author  of  much  public  mischief, 
suffered  the  punishment  due  to  his  atrocious  actions.  Meantime 
Eutropius,  who  acted  as  an  instrument  in  all  the  designs  of 
Stilico  against  Rufinus,  had  the  superintendance  and  controul  of 
all  that  was  done  in  the  court.  Although  he  appropriated  to 
himself  the  principal  part  of  the  property  of  Ruiinus,  yet  he 
granted  to  other  persons  a  share  of  it.  The  wife  of  Rufinus, 
with  her  daughter,  took  refuge  in  a  church  belonging  to  the 
Christians,  through  fear  of  sharing  the  fate  of  her  husband  ; 

VOL.  I.    NO.  &  S- 


138  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  r. 

until  Eutropius  assured  them  that  they  might  sail  unmolested 
to  Jerusalem,  which  was  formerly  the  habitation  of  Jews,  but 
since  the  reign  of  Constantine  had  been  adorned  with  edifices 
constructed  by  the  Christians.  Here  they  passed  the  remain- 
der of  their  days.  Eutropius3  wishing  to  remove  all  persons  of 
any  weight,  that  no  man  might  have  so  great  an  influence  with 
the  emperor  as  himself,  formed  a  plot  against  Timasius,  who  had 
been  a  commander  since  the  reign  of  Valens.  A  false  accusa- 
tion was  made  against  him  to  this  effect. 

A  native  of  Laodicea  in  Syria,  named  Bargus,  who  was  a  re- 
tailer of  provisions,  having  been  detected  there  in  some  misde- 
meanour, fled  from  Laodicea  to  Sardes  ;  where  he  became  famous 
for  his  knavery.      Timasius  having  visited  Sardes,  and  seen  this 
roan,  who  possessed  sufficient  wit  and  cunning  to  flatter   any 
person  into  a  kindness  for  him,  he  made  him  his  familiar,  and 
shortly  gave  him  the  command  of  a  cohort.     He  likewise  took 
him  with  himself  to  Constantinople,  which  displeased  the  magis- 
trates, for  Bargus  had  been  formerly  expelled  from  that  city  for 
some  villainies  of  which  he  had  been  guilty.  Eutropius,  however, 
was  well  pleased  with  it,  having  found  him  a  person  adapted  for 
his  purpose  in  his  false  charge  against  Timasius.     He,  therefore, 
made  him  the  informer,  employing  him  to  impeach  Timasius  of 
treason  in  aiming  at  the  throne.      In  this  cause  the  emperor  sat 
as  president  of  the  court,  but  Eutropius  stood  near  him,  being 
the  imperial  chamberlain,  and  possessing  full  authority  to  pass 
the  sentence.  But  perceiving  the  people  to  be  all  displeased,  that 
a  vender  of  provisions  should  accuse  a  person  who  had  been  so 
great  and  honourable,  the  emperor  left  the  court,  and  left  the 
whole  affair  to  Saturnius  and  Procopius.     The  former  of  these 
was  old,  and  had  filled  several  offices  of  high  importance,   yet 
not  without  adulation,  accustoming  himself  even  in  judicial  cases 
to  humour  those  who  were  the  chief  favourites  of  the  empe- 
ror.    On  the  other  hand,  Procopius,  who  was  father-in-law  tq 
the  emperor  Valens,  was  a  morose  inflexible  man,  and  in  many 
instances  spoke  the  truth  boldly.     Upon  this  occasion,  being  ap- 
pointed a  judge  in  the  cause  of  Timasius,  he  stated  to  Satur- 
nins  these  objections:    that  Bargus  was  not  a  proper  person  to 
accuse  Timasius,  that  a  person  who  had  held  so  many  important 
offices,  and  a  man  of  so  great    honour,  ought  not  to  perish  at 
the  accusation  of  so  mean  and  worthless  an  individual,  and,  that 
it  was  most  improper  that  a  benefactor  should  suffer  from  him 
whom  he  had  patronized.     But  Procopius  gained  no  advantage 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  139 

by  speaking  with  such  freedom,  since  the  opinion  of  Saturnius 
prevailed  and  was  approved. 

Timasius  was,  therefore,  sentenced  to  reside  in  Oasis,  and  was 
sent  there  under  a  common  guard.  This  was  a  barren  inhospitable 
place,  from  which  no  person  had  ever  returned  after  being  carried 
there.  The  road  to  it  being  through  a  sandy  uninhabitable  de- 
sert, those  who  travel  to  Oasis  are  ignorant  of  the  course  they 
pursue,  as  the  wind  fills  up  the  tracks  of  the  feet  with  sand,  nor 
is  there  any  tree  or  house  by  which  they  can  direct  themselves. 
Yet  a  report  was  in  general  circulation,  that  Timasius  was 
rescued  by  his  son  Syagrius,  who  having  eluded  those  who  were 
sent  in  search  of  him,  employed  some  robbers  to  rescue  his  father. 
But  whether  that  report  was  founded  on  truth,  or  was  circulated 
to  mortify  Eutropius,  remains  unknown.  It  is  only  ascertained, 
that  Timasius  and  Syagrius  have  never  been  seen  since  that  pe- 
riod. Bargus,  who  had  thus  delivered  Eutropius  from  all  em- 
barrassment respecting  Timasius,  was  made  commander  of  a  le- 
gion, by  which  he  acquired  a  considerable  income,  yet  had  the 
folly  to  hope  for  still  greater  rewards.  For  he  did  not  reflect, 
that  Eutropius,  who  had  witnessed  his  villainy  towards  his  bene- 
factor Timasius,  would  naturally  apprehend  the  same  towards 
himself.  When  Bargus  was  absent  from  home  on  the  duties  of 
his  office,  Eutropius,  therefore,  persuaded  his  wife,  who  for  some 
occasion  had  quarelled  with  him,  to  present  an  information  to  the 
emperor,  containing  various  accusations  by  which  Bargus  was 
impeached  of  the  greatest  crimes.  Eutropius,  on  hearing  this 
read  before  the  emperor,  immediately  brought  Bargus  to  trial, 
and  on  his  conviction  delivered  him  to  be  punished  as  he  deserved. 
Upon  this  occasion,  all  men  admired  and  praised  the  all-seeing 
eye  of  the  deity,  which  no  wicked  man  can  escape. 

Eutropius,  being  intoxicated  with  wealth,  and  elevated  in  his 
own  imagination  above  the  clouds,  planted  his  emissaries  in  almost 
every  country,  to  pry  into  the  conduct  of  affairs,  and  the  circum- 
stances of  every  individual;  nor  was  there  any  thing  from  which 
he  did  not  derive  some  profit.  His  envy  and  avarice,  therefore, 
excited  him  against  Abundantius,  who  was  born  in  that  part  of 
Scythia  which  belongs  to  Thrace,  but  had  been  a  soldier  from 
the  reign  of  Gratian,  had  received  great  honours  under  Theodo- 
sius,  and  was  appointed  at  that  period  consul.  Eutropius,  having 
the  inclination  to  deprive  him  at  once  of  his  estate  and  dignity, 
the  emperor  authorized  it,  at  least  in  writing  ;  and  Abundantius, 
being  immediately  banished  from  the  court,  was  ordered  to  spend 
the  remainder  of  his  days  at  Sidon  in  Phoenicia.  By  these  means, 


140  THE  HISTORY  *OOK  r. 

though  at  Constantinople,  Eutropius  had  no  person  who  dared  even 
to  look  at  him.  He  recollected  however  that  Stilico  was  master 
of  every  thing  in  the  west ;  and,  therefore,  formed  contrivances 
to  prevent  his  coming  to  Constantinople.  For  this  purpose,  he 
persuaded  the  emperor  to  convoke  the  senate,  and  by  a  public 
decree  to  declare  Stilico  an  enemy  to  the  empire.  This  being  ac- 
complished, he  immediately  made  Gildo  his  friend,  who  was 
governor  of  that  part  of  Africa  which  belongs  to  Carthage,  and 
by  his  assistance  separating  that  country  from  the  dominion  of 
Honorius,  he  annexed  it  to  the  empire  of  Arcadius.  While  Stilico 
was  in  extreme  displeasure  at  this,  and  knew  not  what  course  to 
pursue,  an  extraordinary  circumstance  happened.  Gildo  had  a 
brother  named  Masceldelus,  against  whom  he  had  formed  a  de- 
sign.through  the  barbarous  ferocity  of  his  disposition,  and,  there- 
fore, compelled  him  to  sail  into  Italy  to  Stilico,  to  complain  of 
the  severity  of  his  brother.  Stilico  without  delay  gave  him  a 
competent  number  of  men  and  ships,  and  sent  him  against  Gildo. 
Upon  his  arrival  at  the  place  where  he  heard  that  his  brother 
\vas  stationed,  he  attacked  him  with  all  his  forces  before  he  was 
prepared  for  battle,  and  after  a  furious  engagement  defeated  him 
to  such  a  degree,  that  Gildo  hanged  himself,  in  preference  to 
falling  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  By  means  of  this  victory, 
the  brother  of  Gildo  restored  Africa  to  Honorius,  and  returned 
to  Italy.  Though  Stilico  was  envious  of  him  for  his  great 
achievement,  yet  he  pretended  an  attachment  to  him,  and  gave 
him  favourable  expectations.  But  subsequently,  as  he  was  going 
to  some  place  in  the  suburbs,  and  was  passing  over  the  bridge, 
Masceldelus  among  others  attending  on  him,  the  guards,  in  obe- 
dience to  a  signal  which  Stilico  gave  them,  thurst  Masceldelus 
into  the  river,  where  he  perished  through  the  violence  of 
the  stream. 

From  this  period  the  animosity  between  Eutropius  and  Stilico 
was  very  evident,  and  the  subject  of  general  discourse.  Yet 
though  they  were  at  variance  with  each  other,  they  agreed  in  in- 
sulting with  security  the  miseries  of  the  people,  the  one  having 
given  his  daughter  Maria  in  marriage  to  the  emperor  Honoring 
and  the  other  governing  Arcadius  as  if  he  were  a  sheep,  or  any 
other  tame  animal.  For  if  any  of  the  subjects  had  a  villa  remark- 
able for  elegance,  one  of  them  would  become  its  master.  If  any 
silver  or  gold  were  heard  of,  it  flowed  from  its  former  proprietors 
into  their  coffers;  great  numbers  of  sycophants  being  dispersed 
in  all  places,  who  were  ordered  to  give  notice  of  such  things. 


liOOK'V. 


OF  ZOSIMUS.  141 


As  the  emperors  on  both  sides  were  in  this  state,  all  of  the  Se- 
natorian  order  were  grieved  that  affairs  were  so  badly  circum-' 
stanced,  particularly  Gaines,  who  had  neither  been  rewarded  with 
honour  in  proportion  to  his  long  services,  nor  could  indeed  be  satis- 
fied with  any  presents  that  were  or  could  be  bestowed  on  him,  so 
insatiable  was  his  avarice.  What  stung  him  more  than  the  rest 
was,  that  the  money  all  flowed  into  the  chests  of  Eutropius. 
Being,  therefore,  highly  enraged,  he  made  Tribigildus  an  asso- 
ciate in  his  design,  who  was  a  man  of  extraordinary  boldness, 
and  ready  for  any  hazardous  enterprize.  He  had  under  his  com- 
mand not  Romans  but  Barbarians,  who  were  stationed  in  Phry- 
gia,  where  the  care  of  them  was  committed  to  him  by  the  em- 
peror. Pretending  to  go  into  Phrygia,  to  inspect  the  Barbarians 
under  his  command,  Tribigildus  left  Constantinople.  Leading 
with  him  the  Barbarians  whom  he  commanded,  he  attacked  all 
places  or  persons  that  he  met  with  in  his  march,  nor  did  he  re- 
frain from  murdering  men,  women,  or  children,  but  destroyed 
all  before  him.  In  a  short  time  he  had  collected  such  a  multi- 
tude of  slaves  and  other  desperate  men,  that  he  placed  all  Asia 
in  extreme  danger.  Not  only  was  Lydia  filled  with  tumult,  the 
inhabitants  flying  to  the  sea-coasts,  and  from  thence  sailing  with 
their  families  into  the  islands,  or  to  some  other  country  ;  but  the 
whole  of  Asia  situated  by  the  sea  was  in  expectation  of  greater 
dangers  than  they  had  ever  experienced.  When  these  occurrences 
were  communicated  to  the  emperor,  he  did  not  compassionate 
the  general  calamity,  for  indeed  he  was  incapable  of  understand- 
ing what  was  proper  to  be  done  (so  extremely  feeble  was  he  in 
mind),  but  gave  the  whole  administration  of  the  empire  to  Eutro- 
pius. When  Eutropius  had  obtained  this,  he  appointed  Gaines 
and  Leo  his  generals,  intending  to  send  the  latter  into  Asia  to  at- 
tack the  Barbarians,  or  other  promiscuous  people  who  had  over- 
run it;  and  to  send  Gaines  through  Thrace  and  the  Hellespont, 
if  they  should  be  troublesome  in  that  quarter. 

Leo,  who  was  appointed  to  relieve  the  emergencies  of  Asia, 
was  a  man  devoid  of  all  military  conduct,  and  of  every  other 
qualification  by  which  he  might  deserve  to  be  elevated  to  his 
present  rank,  excepting  only  that  he  was  the  familiar  friend  of 
Eutropius.  However,  for  that  reason  alone  he  was  employed  ; 
and  Gaines  was  sent  into  Thrace,  to  prevent  Tribigildus  and  his 
followers  from  crossing  the  Hellespont,  or  if  there  should  be 
occasion,  to  engage  him  by  sea.  When  these  commanders  were 
thus  instructed,  they  led  off  their  forces  to  their  respective  sta- 
tions. Gaines,  mindful  of  the  compact  between  himself  and 


142  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 

Tribigildus,  and  that  the  time  was  at  hand  for  the  execution  of 
the  project,  commanded  Tribigildus  to  lead  his  army  toward  the 
Hellespont.  Had  he  concealed  his  design  against  the  common- 
wealth, and  departed  quietly  from  Constantinople  with  his  Bar- 
barians, his  whole  plan  would  have  been  accomplished.  Nor 
was  there  any  thing  to  prevent  him  from  seizing  on  Asia,  and  from 
devastating  all  the  east.  But  as  fortune  was  at  that  time  pleased 
to  preserve  those  cities  to  the  Roman  dominion,  Gaines  was  over- 
powered by  his  hot  and  violent  disposition  as  a  Barbarian,  and 
left  Constantinople  with  almost  all  his  forces.  When  he  ap- 
proached Heraclea,  he  instructed  Tribigildus  how  to  act.  But 
Tribigildus  resolved  by  no  means  to  proceed  toward  the  Helles- 
pont, through  apprehension  of  meeting  with  the  forces  in  that 
quarter ;  and,  therefore,  when  he  had  ravaged  all  Phrygia,  he 
fell  upon  Pisidia,  where  meeting  with  no  obstacle,  he  pillaged 
all  the  country  and  retired. 

Though  this  intelligence  was  communicated  to  Gaines,  he  was 
unconcerned  at  the  ravages  that  had  been  committed,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  agreement  subsisting  between  himself  and  Tribi- 
gildus. Leo  in  the  meantime  continued  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Hel- 
lespont, and  was  prevented  by  fear  from  engaging  with  Tribigil- 
dus, excusing  himself,  that  he  was  afraid  lest  Tribigildus  should 
send  out  a  part  of  his  forces,  and  lay-waste  all  the  country  near 
the  Hellespont,  availing  himself  of  his  absence.  By  these  means 
Tribigildus  was  enabled  to  take  all  the  towns  without  opposition, 
and  to  put  to  death  all  their  inhabitants  together  with  the  soldiers. 
Not  a  single  Barbarian  would  fight  for  the  Romans,  but  in  the 
conflicts  joined  their  own  countrymen  against  the  subjects  of 
the  empire. 

Meanwhile  Gaines  pretended  to  be  moved  by  the  misfortunes 
of  the  Romans,  yet  professed  to  admire  the  artifice  and  bravery 
of  Tribigildus,  declaring  that  he  was  invincible  by  reason  of  his 
prudence,  and  that  be  gained  victories  more  by  his  conduct  than 
by  force.  Therefore,  when  he  had  crossed  into  Asia,  he  made 
no  attempt  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  towns  and  provinces, 
but  confined  himself  merely  to  following  the  enemy,  expecting 
that  Tribigildus  would  proceed  into  the  east,  and  privately  sent 
forces  to  his  assistance.  He  had  not  yet  disclosed  his  present 
intentions.  If  Tribigildus  had  passed  into  Phrygia,  and  from 
thence  had  proceeded  not  into  Pisidia,  but  directly  intoLydia,  he 
could  have  encountered  no  obstacle,  but  when  he  had  made  him- 
self master  of  that  country,  might  likewise  have  devastated  Ionia. 
By  crossing  the  sea  from  thence  into  the  islands,  he  might  have 


BOOK  v.  OF    ZOSIMUS-  143 

procured  as  many  ships  as  he  desired,  by  which,  there  not  being 
any  army  able  to  resist  him,  he  would  have  been  enabled  to  over- 
run the  whole  east,  and  to  pillage  every  country  there,  as  well  as 
Egypt.     But  not  thinking  on  these  advantages,  he  resolved  to 
march  into  Pamphylia,  which   borders  on  Pisidia.     He  there  fell 
into  difficult  roads,  through  which  his  horse  could  not  by  any 
means  pass.      As  no  army  resisted  their  progress,  an  inhabitant 
of  Selga  (a  small  town  of  Pamphylia),  named  Valentine,  who  pos- 
sessed some  learning,  and  was  not  inexpert  in  military  affairs,  col- 
lected a  band  of  slaves  and  peasants,  who  had  been  accustomed 
to  contend  with  the  robbers  in  that  quarter.     These  he  posted  on 
the  hills  above  those  places  where  Tribigiidus  had  to  march,   so 
that  they  could  see  every  one  who  passed  that  way  without  being 
themselves  seen,   although  the  enemy  should  march  past  in  the 
open  day.      Tribigiidus,  and  his  Barbarians,  chusing  the  plainest 
way  into  the  lower  part  of  Pamphylia,   and  entering  in  the  night 
into  the  fields  under  Selga,   the  Barbarians  suffered  severely  by 
stones  of  immense  size  thrown  down  upon  them.     They  had  no 
way  of  escape,  there  being  on  one  side  of  the  road  a  deep  lake 
and   morasses,  and  on   the  other  side  a  steep  narrow  passage, 
which  would  scarcely  admit  two  men  abreast.    This  ascent  being 
round  and  winding  is  by  the  natives  called  the  Snail,  from  its  si- 
militude to  that  animal.     In  this  were  placed  a  sufficient  number 
of  men  under  Florentius  to  obstruct  any  who  should  attempt  to 
pass  through  it.     The  Barbarians  being  blocked  up  in  this  place, 
and  great  quantities  of  huge  stones  continually  thrown  at  them, 
they  were  almost  all  killed  ;  since  they  were  confined  in  so  small  a 
space,  that  the  stones  which  fell  from  above  could  not  fail  to  kill 
some  of  them.     Being  therefore  in  great  perplexity,  most  of  them 
plunged  with  their  horses  into  the  lake,  and  to  avoid  death  by  the 
stones  perished  in  the  water.     Tribigiidus,  however,  with  three 
hundred  of  his  men,  ascended  the  Snail,  where  he  bribed  Floren- 
tius and  the  guards  who  were  with  him  with  a  vast  sum  of  money 
tq  permit  them  to  pass.  Having  by  this  means  effected  his  escape, 
he  suffered  the  remainder  to  be  totally  destroyed.     Although  Tri- 
bigiidus concluded  that  he  had  thus  delivered  himself  from  the 
danger  which  Valentine  had  brought  on  him, yet  he  presently  fell 
into  far  greater  peril  than  the  former.     Almost  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  several  towns,  arming  themselves  with  whatever  was  in 
their  reach,  inclosed  him  and  the  three  hundred  men  who  had 
escaped  with  him,  between  the  rivers  Melanes  and  Eurymedon, 
one  of  which  runs  above  Sida,  and  the  other  through  Aspendus. 
Being  thus  reduced  to  great  embarrassment,  he  sent  to  Gaines. 


144 THE  HISTORY DOOK  v, 

This  commander,  though  grieved  at  what  had  occurred,  yet  as  he 
had  not  disclosed  his  sentiments  with  regard  to  the  rebellion, 
sent  Leo,  the  next  in  command  to  himself,  to  the  assistance  of  the 
Pamphylians,  and  to  join  with  Valentine  against  Tribigildus  to 
prevent  him  and  his  men  from  crossing  the  rivers.  Leo,  though 
naturally  pusillanimous  and  through  his  whole  life  devoted  to 
voluptuousness,  obeyed  his  orders.  Gaines  upon  this  became 
afraid  lest  Tribigildus,  being  enclosed  on  every  side,  and  without 
strength  to  engage  the  enemy,  should  be  destroyed.  He  there- 
fore sent  other  Barbarian  troops  who  were  with  him  into  the  Ro- 
man camp  to  enable  Tribigildus  to  escape.  These  Barbarians, 
whom  Gaines  sent  to  Leo  as  auxiliaries,  fell  upon  every  Roman 
with  whom  they  met,  ravaged  the  country,  and  killed  the  soldiers. 
Nor  did  they  cease  to  attack  all  places,  until  they  had  cut  off 
Leo  and  all  his  army,  and  converted  the  whole  country  into  a 
desert  Thus  the  design  of  Gaines  met  with  success.  Tribigil- 
dus, having  escaped  from  Pamphylia,  inflicted  still  greater  mise- 
ries than  before  on  the  cities  of  Phrygia.  Gaines  from  hence  took 
occasion  to  magnify  the  exploits  of  Tribigildus  to  the  emperor, 
and  so  far  alarmed  the  senate  and  the  whole  court,  that  he  per- 
suaded them  that  Tribigildus  would  advance  to  the  Hellespont 
itself,  and  might  nearly  subvert  the  empire,  unless  the  emperor 
should  attend  to  his  demands. 

Gaines  acted  thus  from  policy,  at  once  to  conceal  from  the  em- 
peror his  own  inclinations,  and  to  acquire  by  those  concessions, 
which  Tribigildus  should  extort,  an  opportunity  of  putting  his 
own  projects  into  execution.  For  he  was  not  so  much  displeased 
at  being  himself  neglected,  as  at  the  exaltation  of  Eutropius  to 
the  highest  degree  of  power,  so  as  to  possess  the  dignity  of  con- 
sul, bear  that  title  for  a  considerable  time  together,  and  to  be 
honoured  with  the  patrician  rank.  This  it  was  that  princi- 
pally excited  Gaines  to  sedition.  When  his  design,  therefore, 
was  ripe,  he  first  planned  the  death  of  Eutropius.  With  this 
purpose,  while  he  was  still  in  Phrygia,  he  sent  %to  the  emperor, 
and  informed  him  that  he  despaired  of  any  success,  since  Tribi- 
gildus was  so  artful  a  warrior,  and,  moreover,  that  it  was  impos- 
sible to  sustain  his  fury,  or  to  deliver  Asia  from  the  present  ex- 
tremities, unless  the  emperor  would  comply  with  his  request, 
which  was,  that  Eutropius,  who  was  the  chief  cause  of  all  the 
mischief  which  had  happened,  might  be  delivered  into  his  hands, 
to  be  disposed  of  at  his  own  pleasure. 

When  the  emperor  Arcadius  heard  this,  he  immediately  sent 
for  Eutropius,  deprived  him  of  all  his  dignities,  and  dismissed 


BOOK  v. OF  ZOS1MUS. 145 

him.     Upon  this  he  immediately  fled  for  shelter  to  a  Christian 
church,  which   had  been  made  a  sanctuary  by  himself.     But 
Gaines  being  extremely  urgent,  and  declaring  that  Tribigildus 
would   never  be  appeased  until  Eutropius  was  removed,  they 
seized  him  by  force,  notwithstanding  the  law  for  establishing 
churches  as  sanctuaries,  and  sent  him  to  Cyprus  under  a  strict 
guard.      As  Gaines  still  continued  very  impressively  to  urge  the 
emperor  Arcadius  to  dispatch  him,  the  emperor's  attendants  made 
an  equivocating  evasion  of  the  oath  that  was  sworn  to  Eutropius 
when  he  was  dragged  out  of  the  church,  and  caused  him  to  be 
sent  back  out  of  Cyprus.   Then,  as  if  they  had  only  sworn  not  to 
put  him  to  death  while  he  was  at  Cyprus  or  Constantinople,  they 
sent  him  to   Chalcedon,  and    there    murdered  him.      Fortune 
thus  treated  Eutropius  in  a  most  singular  manner  on  both  hands, 
first  in  exalting  him  to  such  a  height  as  no  eunuch  had  ever 
before  been  raised  to,  and  then  in  exposing  him  to  death,  through 
the  hatred  of  those  who  were  enemies  to  the  commonwealth. 
Gaines,  though  now  evidently  inclined  to  innovation,  yet  thought 
himself  still  undiscovered.      Therefore,  being  absolutely  master 
of  the  will  of  Tribigildus,  as  he  was  much  his  superior  in  power 
and   influence,   he  assisted  him  in  making  peace  with  the   em- 
peror.     After  they  had  mutually  exchanged  oaths,  he  returned 
again  through  Phrygia  and  Lydia.     Tribigildus  followed  him  the 
game  way,  marching  through  Lydia  so  as  not  to  pass  by  Sardes, 
the  metropolis  of  that  country.     When  they  had  formed  a  junc- 
tion at  Thyatira,  Tribigildus  repented  that  he  had  left  Sardes  un- 
pillaged,  since  it  was  easy  to  take  a  city  like  that,  destitute  of  all 
defence.      He,  therefore,   resolved  to  return  there   along  with 
Gaines  and  to  attack  that  city.  Their  design  would  certainly  have 
been  carried  into  effect,  had  not  a  great  quantity  of  rain  fallen, 
which  occasioned  a  great  flood  on  the  land,  and  swelled  the 
rivers  so  as  to  render  them  impassable;    by  which  their  journey 
was  obstructed.      They  then  divided  the  country  between  them, 
and  Gaines  led  his  forces  towards  Bithynia,  and  Tribigildus  his 
towards  the  Hellespont,  permitting  the  Barbarians  who  followed 
them  to  pillage  all  before  them.      By  the  time  when  the  one  had 
arrived  at  Chalcedon,  the  other  had  taken   possession  of  all  the 
places  near  Lampsacus.      Thus  Constantinople,  and  even   the 
whole  empire,  was  in  extreme  danger.      Gaines  then  desired  the 
emperor  to  come  to  him,  being  resolved  to  confer  with  no  one 
except  himself  in  person.      The  emperor  submitted  to  this,  and 
they  met  in  a  place  near  Chalcedon,  where  is  a  church  dedicated 
to  the  martyr   Euphemia,  who  is  honoured  for  her  devotion  to 
VOL.  1.  NO.  2.  T 


146  THE  HISTORY HOOK  v. 

Christ.  It  was  there  agreed  that  Gaines  and  Tribigildus  should 
repair  from  Asia  into  Europe,  and  that  the  most  eminent  persons 
in  the  whole  state  should  be  given  up  to  them  to  be  put  to  death. 
Among  these  were  Aurelianus,  who  was  consul  for  that  year,  Sa- 
turnius  who  had  been  consul,  and  John,  to  whom  the  emperor 
confided  all  his  secrets,  and  who  was  said  by  many  people  to  be 
the  father  of  the  presumed  son  of  Arcadius. 

This  tyrannical  and  insolent  demand  was  complied  with  by  the 
emperor.  But  Gaines,  when  he  had  these  men  in  his  own  hands, 
was  content  with  their  suffering  banishment  He  afterwards 
crossed  into  Thrace,  where  he  commanded  Tribigildus  to  follovr 
him,  leaving  Asia,  which  was  now  beginning  to  recover  breath, 
and  had  a  probability  of  being  delivered  from  all  the  dangers 
that  had  surrounded  it.  While  he  resided  at  Constantinople,  he 
distributed  his  soldiers  into  several  quarters  ;  depriving  the  city 
'even  of  the  court-guards.  He  gave  the  Barbarians  private  in- 
structions, when  they  saw  that  the  soldiers  were  departed  from 
the  city,  immediately  to  attack  it,  being  now  destitute  of  all  pro- 
tection, and  to  deliver  the  sole  authority  into  his  hands. 

Having  given  these  orders  to  the  Barbarians  under  his  com- 
mand, he  left  the  city,  pretending  that  the  fatigues  of  war  had 
impaired  his  health,  and  that  he  was,  therefore,  in  need  of  being 
refreshed,  which  he  should  never  obtain  unless  he  lived  some 
time  without  anxiety.  He  therefore  left  the  Barbarians  in  the 
city,  who  considerably  exceeded  in  number  the  court-guards,  and 
retired  to  a  villa,  about  forty  stadia  from  the  city ;  expecting  an 
opportunity  of  attacking  it  when  the  Barbarians  within  should 
make  their  attempt.  Gaines  was  filled  with  these  hopes  ;  and  had 
he  not  been  led  away  by  the  impetuosity  natural  to  a  Barbarian, 
and  anticipated  the  season  proper  for  his  enterprize,  the  Barba- 
rians must  inevitably  have  made  themselves  masters  of  the  city. 
But  not  waiting  for  the  signal,  he  led  his  soldiers  to  the  wall, 
and  caused  the  sentinels  to  give  an  alarm.  Upon  this  a  general 
tumult  immediately  arose,  with  shrieks  of  women  and  mingled 
cries,  as  if  the  city  had  already  been  taken.  At  length  the  inha- 
bitants collected  together,  and  fell  on  the  Barbarians  within  fhe 
city.  Having  dispatched  these  with  swords,  stones,  or  whatever 
weapons  they  could  find,  they  ran  to  the  wall,  and  with  the  as- 
sistance of  the  guards  so  assailed  the  troops  of  Gaines,  that  they 
repulsed  them  from  entering  the  city. 

The  city  having  thus  escaped  the  danger,  and  the  Barbarians 
within  being  surrounded,  more  than  seven  thousand  of  them 
fled  into  a  church  belonging  to  the  Christians,  which  stands  near 


BOOK  y.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  147 


the  palace,  intending  by  that  sanctuary  to  preserve  themselves. 
The  emperor  commanded  them  to  be  slain  even  in  that  place ; 
nor  would  he  permit  them  to  be  protected  by  it  from  the  just  pu- 
nishment which  their  daring  actions  merited.  But  although  the 
emperor  gave  this  command,  none  bad  courage  to  lay  hands  on 
them,  through  apprehension  tbat  they  would  defend  themselves. 
They,  therefore,  deemed  it  best  to  take  off  the  roof  of  the  church, 
over  what  they  term  the  altar,  and  to  throw  down  firebrands 
upon  them,  until  every  man  should  be  burnt  to  death.  By  these 
means  the  Barbarians  were  destroyed.  This,  in  the  eyes  of  some 
who  were  zealous  for  Christianity,  appeared  a  most  abominable 
crime  to  be  committed  in  the  midst  of  so  great  a  city. 

Gaines,  being  disappointed  in  this  great  attempt,  now  made  open 
preparation  for  war  against  the  commonwealth.  Attacking  first 
the  countries  of  Thrace,  he  found  the  cities  well  protected  by 
walls,  and  defended  by  their  magistrates  and  inhabitants.  For 
having  been  accustomed  to  wars,  and  learned  from  former  incur- 
sions how  to  provide  for  their  own  safety,  they  were  ready  to 
fight  with  the  utmost  zeal.  Gaines,  therefore,  perceiving  nothing 
left  without  the  walls  but  grass,  for  they  had  collected  all  the 
fruits  of  the  country  and  the  cattle,  resolved  to  leave  Thrace, 
and  to  hasten  into  Chersonesus,  intending  to  return  through  the 
streights  of  the  Hellespont  into  Asia.  While  he  was  hesitating 
on  these  measures,  the  emperor  and  the  senate  unanimously  ap- 
pointed Fraiutus  commander  in  the  war  against  Gaines.  He, 
though,  a  Barbarian  by  birth,  was  yet  a  Grecian  in  every  other 
respect^  not  only  in  his  manner  of  living,  but  in  his  disposition 
and  his  religion.  They  therefore  committed  the  management 
of  the  army  to  him,  who  had  been  a  celebrated  leader  in  many 
wars,  and  had  delivered  all  the  east,  from  Cilicia  to  Phoenice  and 
Palestine,  from  the  depredations  of  robbers.  When  he  had  re- 
ceived the  command,  he  marched  against  Gaines,  and  obstructed 
the  passage  of  the  Barbarians  into  Asia  across  the  Hellespont. 
While  Gaines  was  making  preparation  to  engage,  Fraiutus,  urt- 
willing  that  his  men  should  be  inactive,  kept  them  in  continual 
exercise.  By  this  he  so  disposed  them  for  service,  that  instead  of 
being  as  formerly  indolent  and  inactive,  they  were  discontented 
that  Gaines  so  long  delayed  the  war. 

Thus  was  Fraiutus  occupied  in  Asia,  inspecting  not  only  his 
camp  both  day  and  night,  but  also  the  motions  of  the  enemy. 
He  likewise  made  provision  for  naval  affairs,  possessing  a  fleet, 
competent  for  action,  of  the  ships  called  Liburnae,  from  Liburnin, 
a  town  in  Italy,  where  ships  of  that  kind  were  first  built.  These 


148  THE  HISTORY  *OOK  r. 

appear  to  have  been  as  swift-sailing  vessels  as  those  of  fifty  oars, 
although  much  inferior  to  the  triremes.     Poly  bins,  the  historian, 
gives  us  a  description  of  the  proportion   of  the  six-oared  ships, 
which  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians  used  in  their  engagements 
with  each  other.   Gaines,  having  forced  his  way  through  the  long 
•wall  into  the  Chersonesus,  had  ranged  his  troops  along  the  whole 
length  of  the  elevated  shore  in  Thrace,  which  extends  from  op- 
posite Parium  as  far  as  Lampsacus,  Abydos,  and  the  narrowest 
part  of  the  strait,    The  Roman  general,  on  the  other  hand,  sailed 
continually  about  the  coast  of  Asia,  to  observe  the  designs  of  the 
enemy.    Gaines,  from  the  want  of  provisions,  being  uneasy  at  the 
protraction  of  the  time,  cut  down  a  quantity  of  timber  in  a  wood 
in  the  Chersonesus,  which  he  fastened  together  with  great  accu- 
racy, and  rendering  it  capable  to  contain  both  men  and  horses, 
placed  his  troops  upon  it,  and  suffered  them  to  float  with  the 
stream.    These  rafts  were  incapable  of  being  managed  with  oars, 
or  of  admitting  of  the  pilot's  art,  being  hastily  constructed  by  the 
rude  contrivance  of  Barbarians.     He  himself  remained  on  snore, 
in  the  hopes  of  presently  acquiring  a  victory,  supposing  that  the 
Romans  would    not  be  sufficiently  strong  to  contend  against  his 
men  in  an  engagement.     The,  prudent  Roman  general  was  not  in- 
cautious, and,  therefore,  forming  a  conjecture  of  what  was  in 
agitation,  he  commanded  his  ships  to  put  off  a  little  from  land. 
Perceiving  the  rude  vessels  of  the  Barbarians  to  be  carried  with 
the  current  in  whatever  direction  it  drove  them,  he  first  attacked 
the  foremost  of  them  in  front,  and  his  ship,  having  a  stem  of  brass, 
overpowered  it,  not  only  distressing  it  with  his  ship,  but  throw- 
ing darts  at  the  men  who  were  in  it,  and  thus  sunk  both  them 
and  their  vessel.     When  the  crews  of  his  other  ships  saw  this, 
they  imitated  the  example,  killed  some  of  them  with  their  darts, 
while  others,  falling  off  the  rafts,  were  drowned,  and  scarcely  any 
of  them  escaped  with  life.     Gaines,  being  much  grieved  by  thi* 
signal  discomfiture,  and  having  lost  so  many  of  his  troops,  re- 
moved from  the  Chersonesus  into  that  part  of  Thrace  which  is 
beyond  it.     Fraiutus  did   not  then  think  it  expedient  to  pursue 
Gaines,  but  mustered  his  forces  in  the  same  place,  being  contented 
with  the  victory  which  fortune  had  bestowed  on  him.      Fraiutus 
was  now  the  subject  of  general  animadversion,  for  not  pursuing 
Gaines,  but  sparing  him,  because  those  who  were  escaped  with 
him  were  the  fellow-countrymen  of  Fraiutus.    But  being  consci- 
ous of  no  such  intention,  he  returned  to  the  emperor,  proud  of  his 
victory,  which  he  openly  and  boldly  ascribed  to  the  favour  of  the 
gods  whom  he  worshipped.     For  he  was  not  ashamed,  even  in 


BOOK  J.    OF  ZOSIMUS.        149 

the  presence  of  the  emperor,  to  profess  that  he  worshipped  and 
honoured  the  gods  after  the  ancient  custom  of  his  forefathers,  and 
would  not  in  that  instance  follow  the  vulgar  people.  The  em- 
peror received  him  with  great  kindness,  and  appointed  him  con- 
sul. Meantime  Gaines,  having  lost  the  greater  part  of  his  army 
as  I  have  related,  fled  with  the  remainder  to  the  river  Ister. 
Finding  Thrace  to  be  devastated  by  the  former  inroads  it  had 
sustained,  he  pillaged  every  thing  that  was  in  his  reach.  Appre- 
hending, however,  that  another  Roman  army  would  follow  him, 
and  attack  his  Barbarians,  who  were  but  a  small  number,  and 
entertaining  a  suspicion  of  the  Romans  who  accompanied  him, 
he  put  every  man  of  them  to  death,  before  they  were  apprized  of 
his  intention.  He  afterwards  crossed  the  Ister  with  his  Barba- 
rians, designing  to  retire  into  his  own  country,  there  to  spend 
the  remainder  of  his  days. 

While  Gaines  was  thus  proceeding,  Uldes,  who  was  at  that 
period  chief  of  the  Huns,  considering  it  unsafe  to  permit  a  Bar- 
barian followed  by  his  army  to  fix  his  habitation  beyond  the 
Ister  ;  and  at  the  same  time  supposing  that  by  expelling  him 
from  the  country  he  should  gratify  the  Roman  emperor,  provided 
means  to  oppose  him.  Having  mustered  a  considerable  number 
of  troops,  he  drew  them  up  in  order  of  battle  against  the  enemy. 
On  the  other  hand,  Gaines,  perceiving  that  he  could  neither 
return  to  the  Romans,  nor  in  any  other  manner  escape  the  at- 
tacks of  Uldes,  armed  his  followers  and  encountered  the  Huns. 
After  several  conflicts  between  the  two  armies,  in  some  of  which 
the  party  of  Gaines  was  successful,  many  of  his  men  being 
slain,  Gaines  himself  was  at  length  also  killed,  having  fought 
with  great  bravery. 

The  war  being  terminated  by  the  death  of  Gaines,  Uldes,  the 
chief  of  the  Huns,  sent  his  head  to  the  emperor  Arcadius,  and 
was  rewarded  for  this  achievement.  He,  therefore,  entered  into  a 
league  with  the  Romans.  Affairs  being  now  conducted  without 
any  order,  through  the  emperor's  want  of  prudence,  Thrace  was 
again  disturbed.  A  band  of  fugitive  slaves,  and  others  who  had 
deserted  from  the  armies,  pretending  to  be  Huns,  pillaged  all 
the  country,  and  took  whatever  they  found  out  of  the  walls.  At 
length,  Fraiutus  marched  against  them,  and  killing  all  he  could 
iheet  with,  delivered  the  inhabitants  from  their  fears.  *  *•*•*  * 
*  *  *  *  apprehended  that  they  would  be  treated  with  severity. 

*  Here  occurs  a  chasm  in  the  history,  the  sense  of  what  is  wanting  appears 
to  be  this  :  Gaines  formerly  required  Aurelianus,  Saturnius,  and  John,  to  be 
placed  iu  his  power.  It  is  probable  that  he  committed  them  to  custody, 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 


Meeting,  however,  with  him,  they  landed  in  Epirus,  where  con- 
sulting their  own  security,  being  in  great  danger  through  their 
extraordinary  offence,  they  gave  their  prisoners  an  opportunity  to 
escape;  although  it  is  said  by  some,  that  they  were  bribed  by 
them  to  set  them  at  liberty.  However  they  might  escape,  they 
most  unexpectedly  returned  to  Constantinople,  where  they  ap- 
peared before  the  emperor,  the  senate,  and  the  people. 

From  this  time,  the  hatred  which  the  empress  had  conceived 
against  John,  who  was  a  Christian  bishop,  was  greatly  increased. 
Although  she  had  formerly  been  incensed  against  him,  for  having 
been  severe  upon  her  in  his  public  homilies  before  the  people, 
yet  at  this  period,  when  he  and  the  other  two  had  returned,  she 
became  openly  his  enemy.  In  order,  therefore,  to  satisfy  her  re- 
sentment, she  used  great  efforts  to  induce  the  bishops  of  every 
place  to  consent  to  the  removal  of  John.  The  first  and  chief  of 
these  was  Theophilus,  the  bishop  of  Alexandria  in  Egypt,  who 
was  the  first  who  had  opposed  the  ancient  sacred  rites  and  ob- 
servances. Although  a  synod  was  proposed  to  be  held  for  this 
purpose,  John,  finding  that  equity  was  little  attended  to,  left 
Constantinople  of  his  own  accord.  This  giving  offence  to  the 
people,  to  whom  he  had  always  shewn  kindness,  a  tumult  was 
.excited  in  the  city.  The  Christian  church  was  then  filled  with, 
those  men  whom  they  call  Monks.  These  are  persons  who  ab- 
stain from  lawful  marriage,  and  who  fill  large  colleges,  in  many 
cities  and  villages,  with  unmarried  men,  incapable  of  war,  or  of 
any  other  service  to  the  commonwealth.  These  men,  by  their  arts, 
have  from  that  to  the  present  time  acquired  possession  of  exten- 
sive lands,  and  under  the  pretext  of  charity  to  the  poor,  have 
reduced  (I  might  almost  say)  all  other  men  to  beggary.  These 
Monks  having  now  entered  the  churches,  prevented  the  people 
from  coming  to  their  usual  devotion.  This  so  enraged  the 
populace  and  the  soldiers,  that  they  attempted  to  suppress,  and 
as  it  were  to  lop  off,  the  luxuriant  insolence  of  the  Monks.  The 
signal  being  given  them  for  this  purpose,  they  made  a  fierce  at- 
tack, and  without  trial  or  examination  put  all  the  Monks  to  the 

until  he  should  think  it  expedient  to  punish  them.  The  keepers  appear  to 
have  given  their  prisoners  leave  to  escape,  fearing  that  they  would  be  harshly 
treated  if  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  Fraiutus.  It  is  the  conjecture  of  Sylbur- 
gius  that  X/av  is  the  termination  of  the  word  0c<r<raX/a>/,  Thessaly;  or  of 
I  la  pa  Am  v,  which  signifies  the  vicinity  of  the  sea-coast ;  and  that  Fraiutus 
designed  to  enter  that  country,  in  order  to  apprehend  the  traitors  and  puqish 
them  as  they  deserved.  We  must  suppose  the  followiug  words  to  relate 
to  them. 


BOOK  y.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  151 

sword,  until  they  had  filled  the  churches  with  dead  bodies,  and 
pursuing  those  who  fled,  wounded  every  one  whom  they  met  in 
black  clothes.  Among  these  many  were  killed  through  mistake, 
who  were  either  in  mourning,  or  wore  such  a  dress  from  any 
other  cause. 

John,  having  returned  again,  attempted  a  repetition  of  the 
same  measures,  and  excited  similar  commotions  in  the  city. 
The  number  of  sycophants  was  now  greater  than  it  had  ever 
formerly  been,  always  attending  on  the  court-eunuchs.  Upon 
the  death  of  any  wealthy  person  they  brought- information  of  his 
estate,  as  if  he  had  no  children  or  relations.  Upon  this  the  empe- 
ror's letters  were  issued,  commanding  the  estate  to  be  put  in 
possession  of  a  particular  person.  Inheritances  were  even  disposed 
of  to  any  who  begged  them,  although  the  children  of  the  party 
stood  by,  lamenting  and  calling  on  their  parent.  In  fine,  every 
thing  combined  to  fill  the  cities  with  grief,  and  to  injure  the  in- 
habitants. For  the  emperor  being  a  mere  ideot,  his  wife,  who 
exceeded  in  arrogance  the  rest  of  her  sex,  and  was  devoted  to  the 
insatiable  avarice  of  eunuchs  and  her  female  attendants,  who  had 
the  greatest  influence  with  her,  caused  every  one  to  be  weary  of 
life;  so  that  to  modest  persons  nothing  was  then  so  eligible, 
as  death. 

•  As  if  these  circumstances  did  not  sufficiently  heighten  the 
public  misery,  another  inconceivable  disaster  fell  on  Constanti- 
nople. John,  as  I  have  related,  having  returned  from  his  banish- 
ment, and  instigating  the  populace  against  the  empress  in  his 
usual  sermons,  finding  himself  expelled  both  from  his  episcopal 
see  and  from  the  city,  embarked  and  left  the  city.  Those  who 
had  espoused  his  party,  endeavouring  to  prevent  any  person  from 
succeeding  to  his  bishopric,  privately  set  fire  to  a  church  in 
the  night,  and  left  the  city  at  break  of  day,  in  order  to  avoid 
detection.  As  soon  as  it  was  day,  the  people  discovered  the  ex- 
treme danger  in  which  the  city  stood.  Not  only  was  the  church 
burnt  to  the  ground,  but  the  adjacent  houses  were  likewise  con- 
sumed, especially  those  on  which  the  violence  of  the  wind  di- 
rected the  flames.  Besides  these,  the  fire  extended  to  the  senate- 
house,  which  stood  before  the  palace,  and  was  a  most  beautiful 
and  magnificent  edifice.  It  was  adorned  with  statues  by  the 
most  celebrated  artists,  which  had  a  most  splendid  appearance; 
and  with  marble  of  such  colours,  as  are  not  now  to  be  found  in 
any  quarries.  It  is  is  said  that  the  images  which  were  formerly 
consecrated  in  Helicon  to  the  muses,  and  in  the  time  of  Con- 
atantine  suffered  by  the  universal  sacrilege,  having  been  erected 


152  THE  HISTORY  HOOK  r. 

and  dedicated  in  this  place,  were  burnt  at  the  same  time,  as  if  to 
denote  the  disregard  which  all  men  should  one  day  bear  to 
the  muses. 

At'that  time  occurred  a  miracle  which  I  think  not  unworthy 
of  being  mentioned.  Before  the  doors  of  the  temple  of  the  se- 
nate were  the  statues  of  Jupiter  and  Minerva,  standing  on  two 
pedestals,  as  they  still  continue.  That  of  Jupiter  is  said  to  be  the 
Jupiter  Dodonaeus,  and  that  of  Minerva  the  same  which  was  for- 
merly consecrated  in  Lindus.  When  the  fire  consumed  the  tem- 
ple, the  lead  on  its  roof  melted  and  ran  down  on  the  statues,  and 
all  the  stones  which  could  not  resist  the  force  of  the  fire  likewise 
fell  upon  them,  until  at  length  the  beauty  of  the  building  was 
converted  into  a  heap  of  rubbish,  and  it  was  generally  supposed 
that  these  two  statues  were  also  reduced  to  ashes.  But  when  the 
ruins  were  removed,  the  statues  of  these  two  deities  alone  ap- 
peared to  have  escaped  the  general  destruction.  This  circum- 
stance inspired  all  persons  above  the  ordinary  rank  with  more 
favourable  hopes  for  the  city,  as  if  these  deities  resolved  to 
afford  it  their  continual  protection. 

Leaving  these  circumstances,  however,  to  be  disposed  of  at  the 
will  of  the  deity,  I  return  to  my  narrative.  An  universal  sorrow 
now  prevailed  for  the  calamity  of  the  city,  which  was  solely  at- 
tributed to  what  is  called  blind  chance ;  while  the  emperor's  at- 
tendants were  occupied  in  rebuilding  the  ruined  houses.  At  the 
same  time  it  was  reported  at  court,  that  a  great  number  of  Isau- 
rians,  who  reside  in  the  inaccessible  crags  of  Mount  Taurus, 
had  overrun  the  adjacent  country  in  several  bands.  Although 
they  were  not  sufficiently  strong  to  attack  the  fortified  towns, 
yet  they  ravaged  all  the  un walled  villages,  and  plundered  every 
thing  before  them.  For  by  the  former  ravages  which  Tribigildus 
and  his  Barbarians  had  committed  there,  their  present  incursions 
were  rendered  more  easy.  When  this  intelligence  was  brought, 
Arbazacius  was  sent  as  commander  to  the  relief  of  the  oppressed 
Pamphylians.  Taking  along  with  him  a  competent  army,  he 
pursued  the  robbers  into  the  mountains,  took  most  of  their  vil- 
lages, and  destroyed  immense  numbers  of  their  men.  Indeed, 
he  might  with  ease  have  perfectly  subdued  them, and  have  placed 
the  towns  in  absolute  security,  had  he  not  relaxed  from  his  vi- 
gour, by  yielding  himself  to  luxury  and  lascivious  pleasures,  or 
through  his  avarice  preferred  riches  to  the  public  advantage. 
Being  summoned  for  this  treacherous  behaviour  before  the  em- 
peror, he  expected  to  undergo  a  trial ;  but  by  giving  to  the  em- 
press a  part  of  what  he  had  taken  from  the  Isaurians,  he  not 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  153 

only  escaped  the  law,  but  spent  the  rest  of  his  money  in  such 
pleasures  as  the  city  afforded. 

The  Isaurians  thus  contented  themselves  with  the  commission 
of  private  robberies,  and  had  not  yet  broken  out  into  an  open  in- 
vasion of  neighbouring  nations.     In  the  mean  time,  Alaric,  having 
inarched,  as  I  before  related,  out  of  the  Peloponnesus,  and  all  the 
country  through  which  the  river  Achelous  flows,  halted  in  Epirus, 
in  which  reside  the  Molopians,  the  Thesprotians,  and  other  na- 
tions.    He  intended  to  remain  there  until  Stilico  had  completed 
what  they  had  agreed  on,  which  was  to  this  effect.     Stilico,  per- 
ceiving that  the  ministers  of  Arcadius  were  averse  to  him,  in- 
tended, by    means  of  the  assistance  of  Alaric,  to  add  to  the  em- 
pire of  Honorius  all  the  Illyrian  provinces.     Having  formed  a 
compact  with  Alaric  to  this  purpose,  he  expected  shortly  to  put 
his  design  in  execution.     While  Alaric  waited  for  his  commands, 
Rhodogaisus,    having  collected  four  hundred   thousand  of  the 
Celts,  anil  the  German  tribes  that  dwell  beyond  the  Danube  and 
the   Rhine,  made  the   preparations  for  passing  over  into  Italy. 
This  intelligence,  when  first  communicated,  occasioned  a  general 
consternation.     While  the  several  towns  sunk  into  despondency, 
and  even  Rome  itself  was  filled  with  apprehension  of  its  danger, 
Stilico  took  with  him  all  the  forces  that  were  stationed  at  Tici- 
num  in  Liguria,  which  amounted  to  about  thirty  cohorts,  and  all 
the  auxiliaries  that  he  could  procure  from  the  Alani  and  Huns, 
and  without  waiting  for  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  crossed  the 
Danube  with  all  his  forces.      Thus  attacking  the  Barbarians  be- 
fore they  were  aware,  he  completely  destroyed  their  whole  forces, 
none  of  them  escaping,  except  a  few  which  he  added  to  the  Ro- 
man auxiliaries.  -  Stilico,  as  may  be  supposed,  was  highly  elated 
by  this  victory,   and  led  back  his  army,  receiving  garlands  from 
the  people  of  every  place,  for  having  in  so  unusual  a  manner  de- 
livered Italy  from  the  dangers  which  she  so  much  dreaded  and 
expected.      He  arrived  at  Ravenna,  an  ancient  city,  which  is  the 
metropolis  of  the  province  of  Flaminia,  and  a  Thessalian  colony. 
It  is  called  Rhene,  because  it  is  surrounded  by  water  (as  the  word 
Rhene  imports),  and  not  so  named,  as  Olympiodorus  of  Thebes' 
relates,  from  Remus,  the  brother  of  Romulus,  who  founded  it; 
for  he  must  yield  in  this  to  Quadratus,  who  has  mentioned  this1 
very  circumstance  in  his  history  of  the  emperor  Marcus.     At  Ra- 
venna, Stilico  being  intent  on  his  preparations  for  attacking  the 
Illyrian  towns,  and  by  the  aid  of  Alaric  expecting  to  separate 
them  from  Arcadius,  and  to  unite  them  to  the  empire  of  Hono- 
rius, two  impediments  at   the  same  time  happened  to  fall  in  hi« 

1,    NO,    2v  II 


154  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 


way.  These  were  a  report  that  Alaric  was  dead,  and  letters  from 
the  emperor  Honorius  at  Rome,  informing  him  that  Constantine 
had  revolted,  and  had  advanced  from  the  island  of  Britain  into  the 
Transalpine  provinces,  where  he  conducted  himself  in  the  cities 
as  emperor.  The  rumour  concerning  the  death  of  Alaric  appear- 
ed doubtful,  before  some  persons  arrived  and  assured  him  of  the 
reality  of  it.  But  the  report  that  Constantine  had  set  up  for  the 
empire  was  universally  believed.  Stilico,  being  thus  prevented 
from  executing  his  intended  expedition  against  the  Illyrians, 
proceeded  to  Rome  to  consult  with  other  persons  concerning 
the  present  state  of  affairs. 

After  the  autumn  was  terminated,  and  winter  had  commenced, 
Bassus  and  Philippus  being  chosen  consuls,  the  emperor  Houo- 
rius,  who  had  long  before  lost  his  wife  Maria,  desired  to  marry 
her  sister  Thermantia.     But  Stilico  appeared  not  to  approve  of 
the  match,  although  it  was  promoted  by  Serena,  who  wished  it  to 
take  place  from  these  motives.      When  Maria  was  about  to  be 
married  to  Honorius,  her  mother,  deeming  her  too  young  for  the 
marriage-state  and  being,unwilling  to  defer  the  marriage,  although 
she  thought  that  to  submit  so  young  and  tender  a  person  to  the 
embraces  of  a  man  was  offering  violence  to  nature,  she  had  re- 
course to  a  woman  who  knew  how  to  manage  such  affairs,  and 
by  her  means  contrived  that  Maria  should  live  with  the  emperor 
and  §hare  his  bed,  but  that  he  should  not  have  the  power  to  de- 
prive   her  of  virginity.      In  the  meantime  Maria  died  a  virgin, 
and  Serena,  who,  as  may  readily  be  supposed,  was  desirous  to  be- 
come the  grandmother  of  a  young  emperor  or  empress,  through 
fear  of  her  influence  being  diminished,  used  all  her  endeavours 
to  marry  her  other  daughter  to  Honorius.     This  being  accom- 
plished, the  young  lady  shortly  afterwards  died  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  the  former.     About  the  same  time,   Stilico  was  informed, 
that  Alaric  had  left  Epirus,  and  having  passed  through  the  defiles 
that 'form  a  passage  from  Pannonia  to  Venice,  had  pitched  his 
camp  at  a  town  called  Emo,  which  is  situated  between  the  Upper 
Pannonia  and  Noricum.      It  would  not  be  impertinent  to  notice 
what  is  remarkable  concerning  this  town  and  its  origin.      It  is 
said,  that  the  Argonauts,  being  pursued  by  ^etas,  arrived  at  the 
mouth  of  the  Ister  by  which  it  discharges  itself  into  the  Pontus, 
and  deemed  it  their  best  resource  to  proceed  up  that  river  against 
the  stream,  by  the  help  of  oars  and  convenient  gales  of  wind,  until 
they  should  approach  nearer  to  the  st  ;•.       Having  effected   this, 
and  arrived  at  that  plaee,   they   left  a  memorial  of  their  arrival 
there,  which  was  the  building  of  the  town.     Afterwards  placing 


UOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  155 


their  ship,  the  Argo,  on  machines  purposely  constructed,  they 
drew  it  four  hundred  stadia,  as  far  as  the  sea-side,  and  thus  ar- 
rived at  the  Thessalian  shore,  as  is  related  by  the  Poet  Pisander, 
who  has  comprehended  almost  the  whole  story  in  a  poem  called 
The  Heroic  Marriages  of  the  Gods.  Alaric,  having  marched  out 
of  Emo,  and  crossed  the  river  Aquilis,  passed  over  the  Apennine 
mountains,  and  entered  Noricum. 

The  Apennine  mountains  are  situated  on  the  borders  of  Pan- 
nonia,  and  render  the  way  into  Noricum  very  narrow,  wherefore, 
if  the  pass  were  guarded  by  a  small  number,  a  large  force  would 
find  great  difficulty  in  penetrating  it.  Notwithstanding  this  dif- 
ficulty, Alaric  advanced  through  into  Noricum,  and  from  thence 
sent  messengers  to  Stilico,  to  desire  a  sum  of  money  not  only  in 
consideration  of  his  stay  in  Epirus,  which  he  said  was  made  at 
the  persuasion  of  Stilico,  but  also  to  defray  his  journey  into  Nori- 
cum and  Italy.  But  Stilico,  although  he  received  the  embassy, 
left  those  who  brought  it  at  Ravenna,  and  proceeded  himself  to 
Rome,  with  a  design  to  consult  the  emperor  and  the  senate  upon 
this  affair.  When  the  senate  was  assembled  at  the  imperial  pa- 
lace, and  deliberated  whether  to  declare  war,  most  of  them  were 
disposed  for  war.  Stilico,  and  a  few  others  who  complied  with 
him  merely  through  fear,  were  of  a  contrary  opinion,  and  voted 
for  a  peace  with  Alaric.  When  those  who  preferred  a  war  de- 
sired of  Stilico  his  reason  for  chusing  peace  rather  than  war,  and 
wherefore,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  Roman  name,  he  was  willing 
basely  to  purchase  it  with  money,  he  replied,  "  Alaric  has  conti- 
nued this  length  of  time  in  Epirus  that  he  may  join  with  me 
against  the  emperor  of  the  east,  and  separating  the  Illyrians  from 
that  dominion,  add  them  to  the  subjects  of  Honorius."  This,  he 
said,  would  have  been  effected  before  this  period,  had  not  letters 
in  the  mean  time  arrived  from  the  emperor  Honorius,  which  de- 
ferred the  expedition"  to  the  east,  in  expectation  of  which  Alaric 
had  spent  so  much  time  in  that  country.  When  Stilico  had  said 
these  words,  he  produced  an  ^pistle  from  the  emperor,  and  said 
that  Serena  was  the  occasion  of  all,  wishing  to  preserve  an  invio- 
lable friendship  between  the  two  emperors. 

The  senate,  therefore,  imagining  that  Stilico  spoke  nothing  but 
what  was  reasonable,  decreed  that  Alaric  should  receive  three 
thousand  pounds  of  silver  in  consideration  of  maintaining  peace, 
although  most  of  them  gave  their  voices  more  in  dread  of  Stilico 
than  of  their  own  judgment  or  inclination.  For  this  reason,  Lam- 
padius,  a  person  of  exalted  birth  and  rank,  having  uttered  this 
Latin  sentence,  Non  est  ista  pax,  sed  pactio  seruitutis,  This  is  not 


156 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 


a  peace,  bat  a  bond  of  servitude,  he  was  compelled,  as  soon  as  the 
senate  was  dismissed,  to  fly  into  a  neighbouring  church,  belong- 
ing to  the  Christians,  from  the  fear  of  being  punished  for  the 
freedom  with  which  he  had  expressed  himself. 

Stilico,  after  having  in  this  manner  made  peace  with  Alaric, 
prepared  very  earnestly  for  his  journey,  in  order  to  put  his  designs 
in  execution.  The  emperor  declared,  that  he  would  also  pro- 
ceed from  Rome  to  Ravenna,  to  view  and  encourage  the  army, 
especially  as  so  powerful  an  enemy  was  arrived  in  Italy.  Yet 
this  he  did  not  say  of  his  own  inclination,  but  was  prompted 
to  it  by  Serena.  For  she  wished  him  to  reside  in  a  more  se- 
jcure  city,  that  if  Alaric  should  infringe  the  treaty  and  attack 
Rome,  he  might  not  take  the  emperor's  person.  She  was  the 
more  zealous  for  his  preservation,  since  her  own  security  de- 
pended on  his.  Stilico,  however,  being  much  averse  to  the  em- 
peror's journey  to  Ravenna,  contrived  many  obstacles  to  prevent 
it.  As  the  emperor,  notwithstanding,  would  not  alter  his  inten- 
tions, but  was  still  determined  on  his  journey,  Sams,  a  Barbarian, 
and  captain  of  a  company  of  Barbarians  at  Ravenna,  excited  a 
mutiny  before  the  city  at  the  instigation  of  Stilico.  His  design 
was  not  really  to  throw  affairs  into  confusion,  but  to  deter  the 
emperor  from  coming  to  Ravenna.  But  as  the  emperor  persisted 
in  his  resolution,  Justinian,  an  excellent  lawyer  at  Rome,  whom 
Stilico  chose  as  his  assistant  and  counsellor,  through  the  sagacity 
of  his  judgment,  formed  a  near  conjecture  of  the  design  for  which 
the  emperor  made  that  journey,  and  that  the  soldiers  in  Ticinum, 
who  were  disaffected  to  Stilico,  when  the  emperor  arrived  there, 
would  reduce  him  in.to  circumstances  of  great  danger.  He,  there- 
fore, continually  advised  him  to  dissuade  the  emperor  from  his 
present  intentions.  But  when  Justinian  found  that  the  emperor 
would  not  listen  to  the  counsel  of  Stilico,  he  forsook  him,  lest 
through  his  familiarity  with  Stilico  he  should  share  in  his 
misfortunes. 

Before  this  juncture  a  report  had  been  circulated  at  Rome, 
that  the  emperor  Arcadius  was  dead,  which  was  confirmed  after 
the  departure  of  Arcadius  for  Ravenna.  Stilico  being  at  Ravenna 
while  the  emperor  was  at  a  city  of  ^Emilia,  called  Bononia,  about 
seventy  miles  distant,  the  emperor  sent  for  him  to  chastise  the 
soldiers,  who  mutinied  amongst  each  other  by  the  way.  Stilico, 
therefore,  having  collected  the  mutinous  troops  together,  inform- 
,C-d  them  that  the  emperor  had  commanded  him  to  correct  them 
for  their  disobedience,  and  to  punish  them  by  a  decimation,  or 
putting  to  death  every  tenth  man.  At  this  they  were  in  sudi 


BOOK  v.  OF    ZOSIMUS.  15? 


consternation,  that  they  burst  into  tears,  and  desiring  him.  to  have 
compassion  on  them,  prevailed  on  him  to  promise  them  a  pardon 
from  the  emperor.  The  emperor  having  performed  what  Stilico 
had  promised,  they  applied  themselves  to  public  business.  For 
Stilico  was  desirous  of  proceeding  to  the  east  to  undertake  the 
management  of  the  affairs  of  Theodosius,  the  son  of  Arcadius, 
who  was  very  young,  and  in  want  of  a  guardian.  Honorius  him- 
self was  also  inclined  to  undertake  the  same  journey,  with  a  de- 
sign to  secure  the  dominions  of  that  emperor.  But  Stilico,  being 
displeased  at  that,  and  laying  before  the  emperor  a  calculation  of 
the  immense  sum  of  money  it  would  require  to  defray  the  ex- 
pence  of  such  an  expedition,  deterred  him  from  the  enterprise. 
He  likewise  observed  to  him,  that  the  rebellion  of  Constantine 
would  not  admit  of  his  going  so  far,  as  not  to  protect  Italy  and 
Rome  itself,  since  that  usurper  had  over-run  all  Gaul,  and  then 
resided  at  Orleans.  Moreover,  though  what  he  had  pointed  out 
was  sufficient  to  deserve  the  attention  and  presence  of  the  empe- 
for,  Alaric  was  also  approaching  with  a  vast  force  of  Barbarians, 
who,  being  a  Barbarian  and  void  of  faith,  when  he  should  find 
Italy  devoid  of  all  aid,  would  certainly  invade  it.  He,  therefore, 
deemed  it  the  best  policy  and  most  conducive  to  the  public  ad- 
vantage, that  Alaric  should  undertake  the  expedition  against  the 
rebel  Constantine  along  with  part  of  his  Barbarians  and  some  Ro- 
man legions  with  their  officers,  who  should  share  in  the  war.  Sti- 
lico added  that  he  himself  would  proceed  to  the  east,  if  the  empe- 
ror desired  it,  and  would  give  him  instructions  how  to  act  there. 

The  emperor,  deceived  by  these  specious  representations  of  Sti- 
lico, gave  him  letters  both  to  the  emperor  of  the  east  and  to  Ala- 
ric, and  departed  from  Bononia.  But  Stilico  remained  there,  and 
neither  proceeded  to  the  east,  nor  performed  any  thing  else  that 
was  designed.  He  did  not  even  send  over  any  of  the  soldiers, 
who  were  in  Ticinum,  to  Ravenna  or  any  other  place,  lest  they 
should  meet  the  emperor  by  the  way,  and  incite  him  to  do  any 
thing  to  the  prejudice  of  himself. 

Stilico,  being  in  these  circumstances,  although  he  was  not  con- 
scious of  any  ill  intention  either  against  the  emperor  or  the  sol- 
diers, Olympius,  a  native  of  the  vicinity  of  the  Euxine  sea,  arid 
an  officer  of  rank  in  the  court-guards,  concealed  under  the  dis- 
guise of  the  Christian  religion  the  most  atrocious  designs  in  his 
heart.  Being  accustomed,  because  of  his  affected  modesty  and 
gentle  demeanor,  to  converse  frequently  with  the  emperor,  he  used 
many  bitter  expressions  against  Stilico,  and  stated  that  he  was 
desirous  to  proceed  into  the  east,  from  no  other  motive  than  to 


158  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 

acquire  an  opportunity  of  removing  the  young  Theodosius,  and 
of  placing  the  empire  in  the  hands  of  his  own  son,  Eucherius. 
These  observations  he  made  to  the  emperor  as  they  were  travel- 
ling, having  then  a  good' opportunity  of  doing  it.     And  when  the 
emperor  WHS  at  Ticinum,  Olympius,  accustoming  himself  to  visit 
the   sick  soldiers,  which  was  the  master-piece  of  his  hypocrisy, 
dispersed  among  them,  likewise,  similar  insinuations.     When  the 
emperor  had  been  at   Ticinum  four  days,  all  the  soldiers  being 
convened  into  the  court,  the  emperor  appeared  before  them,  and 
exhorted  them  to  a  war  against  the  rebel  Constantine.      Finding 
that  none  of  them  were  moved  at  any  thing  relative  to  Stilico, 
Olympius  was  observed  to  nod  to  the  soldiers,  as  if  to  remind 
them  of  what  he  had  said  to  them  in  private.     At  this  they  were 
excited  almost  to  madness,  and  killed  Limenius,  who  was  prefect 
of  the  court  in  the  nations  beyond  the  Alps,  and  with  him  Chari- 
obaudes,  the  commander  of  the  legions  in  those  parts.     For  these 
two  had  accidentally  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  usnrper,  and 
were  come  to  the  emperor  at  Ticinum.    Beside  these  two  were 
slain  Vincentius  and  Salvius,  the  former,  the  commander  of  the  ca- 
valry, and  the  latter  of  the  domestic  forces.      As   the  tumult  in- 
creased, the  emperor  retired  into  the  palace,  and  some  of  the  ma- 
gistrates escaped.   The  soldiers,  then  dispersing  themselves  about 
the  city,  killed  as  many  of  the  magistrates  as  they  could  lay  hands 
on,  tearing  them  out  of  the  houses  into  which  they  had  fled,  and 
plundered  all  the  town.     So  violent  was  the  commotion,  that  the 
emperor,   finding  the   disorder   beyond  remedy,  put  on  a  short 
mantle,  and  without  either  his  long  robe  or  his  diadem,   issuing 
into  the  midst  of  the  city,  had  great  difficulty  in  appeasing  and 
restraining  their  fury.     For  those  magistrates  who  were  taken, 
even  after  their  flight,  were  murdered.     Among  these  were  Nae- 
morius  commander  of  the  court-bands,  Petronius,  the  treasurer 
and  steward  of  the  emperor's  private  property,  and  Salvius,  whose 
office  it  was  to  proclaim  the  intentions  of  the  emperor  upon  any 
occasion,  which  officer  had  borne  the  title  of  Questor  from  the 
time  of  Constantine.     Nor  could  the  latter  escape  death,  though 
he  embraced  the  emperor's   knees.     The   tumult  continued  till 
late  in  the  night,  and  the  emperor  fearing  lest  any  violence  should 
be   committed  against  his  own  person  also,  for  which  reason  he 
withdrew.  They  then  happened  to  find  Longinianus,  the  prefect 
of  the  court  for  Italy,   whom  they  put   to  death.    All  these 
magistrates  were  slain  by  the  infuriated  soldiers.   There  likewise 
perished  so  great  a  number  of  promiscuous  persons  as  is  beyond 
all  computation. 


BOOK  v. OF  ZOSIMUS.  159 

When  intelligence  of  this  reached  Stilico,  who  was  then  at  Bo- 
nonia,  he  was  extremely  disturbed  by  it.  Summoning,  therefore, 
all  the  commanders  of  his  confederate  Barbarians,  who  were  with 
him,  he  proposed  a  consultation  relative  to  what  measures  it 
would  be  most  prudent  to  adopt.  It  was  agreed  with  common 
consent,  that  if  the  emperor  were  killed,  which  was  yet  doubtful", 
all  the  confederated  Barbarians  should  join  together,  and  fall  at 
once  on  the  Roman  soldiers,  and  by  that  means  afford  a  warning 
to  all  others  to  use  greater  moderation  and  submissiveness.  But 
if  the  emperor  were  safe,  although  the  magistrates  were  cut  off, 
the  authors  of  the  tumult  were  to  be  brought  to  condign  punish- 
ment. Such  was  the  result  of  the  consultation  held  by  Stilico 
with  his  Barbarians.  When  they  knew  that  no  indignity  had 
been  offered  to  the  person  of  the  emperor,  Stilico  resolved  to  pro- 
ceed no  further  in  punishing  or  correcting  the  soldiers,  but  to  re- 
turn to  Ravenna.  For  he  reflected  both  on  the  number  of  the 
soldiers,  and  that  the  emperor  was  not  stedfastly  his  friend.  Nor 
did  he  think  it  either  honourable  or  safe  to  incite  Barbarians 
against  the  Roman  army. 

Stilico  being  therefore  filled  with  anxiety  concerning  these  cir- 
cumsfances,  the  Barbarians  who  were  with  him  were  very  desirous 
of  putting  in  force  their  former  resolutions,  and  therefore  endea- 
voured to  dissuade  him  from  the  measures  which  he  afterwards 
thought  proper  to  be  adopted.  But  being  unable  to  prevail  with 
him,  they  all  determined  to  remain  in  some  place  until  they 
should  be  better  apprized  of  the  emperor's  sentiments  towards  Sti- 
lico, with  the  exception  of  Sarus,  who  excelled  all  the  other  con- 
federates in  power  and  rank,  and  who,  accompanied  by  the  Barba- 
rians under  his  command,  having  killed  all  the  Huns  who  formed 
the  guard  of  Stilico  while  they  were  asleep,  and  having  seized 
all  the  carriages  that  followed  him,  entered  his  tent,  in  which  he 
remained  to  observe  the  event.  Upon  this  Stilico,  observing  that 
his  Barbarians  were  quarrelling  among  each  other,  hastened  to 
Ravenna,  and  engaged  the  cities,  in  which  were  any  women  or 
children  belonging  to  the  Barbarians,  not  to  afford  reception  to 
any  of  the  Barbarians  if  they  should  come  to  them.  In  the  mean- 
time Olympius,  who  \vas  now  become  master  of  the  emperor's 
inclination,  sent  the  imperial  mandate  to  the  soldiers  at  Ravenna, 
ordering  them  immediately  to  apprehend  Stilico,  and  to  detain 
him  in  prison  without  fetters.  When  Stilico  heard  this,  he  took 
refuge  in  a  Christian  church  that  was  near,  while  it  was  night, 
His  Barbarians  and  his  other  familiars,  who,  with  his  servants, 
were  all  armed,  upon  seeing  this  expected  what  would  ensue. 


ICO  THE  HISTORY  BOO*  v. 

When  day  appeared,  the  soldiers,  entering  the  church,  swore  be- 
fore the  bishop,  that  they  were  commanded  by  the  emperor  not 
to  kill  Stilico,  but  to  keep  him  in  custody.  Being  brought  out 
of  the  church,  and  in  the  custody  of  the  soldiers,  other  letters 
were  delivered  by  the  person  who  brought  the  first,  in  which  the 
punishment  of  death  was  denounced  against  Stilico,  for  his 
crimes  against  the  commonwealth.  Thus,  while  Eucherius,  his 
son,  fled  towards  Rome,  Stilico  was  led  to  execution.  The  Bar- 
barians who  attended  him,  with  his  servants  and  other  friends 
and  relations,  of  whom  there  was  a  vast  number,  preparing  and 
resolving  to  rescue  him  from  the  stroke,  Stilico  deterred  them 
from  the  attempt  by  all  imaginable  menaces,  and  calmly  submit- 
ted his  neck  to  the  sword.  He  was  the  most  moderate  and  just 
of  ail  the  men  who  possessed  great  authority  in  his  time.  For 
although  he  was  married  to  the  niece  of  the  first  Theodosi  us,  was 
entrusted  with  the  empires  of  both  his  sons,  and  had  been  a  com- 
mander twenty-three  years,  yet  he  never  conferred  military  rank 
for  money,  or  coverted  the  stipend  of  the  soldiers  to  his  own  use. 
Being  the  father  of  one  only  son,  he  offered  to  him  the  office  of 
tribune  of  the  Notarii,  and  limitted  him  neither  to  desire  nor  at- 
tempt obtaining  any  other  office  or  authority.  In  order  that  no 
studious  person,  or  astrologers,  may  be  ignorant  of  the  time  of  his 
death,  I  shall  relate,  that  it  happened  in  the  consulship  of  Bassus 
and  Philippus,  during  which  the  emperor  Arcadius  submitted  to 
fate,  on  the  twenty-second  day  of  August. 

After  the  death  of  Stilico,  all  the  affairs  of  the  court  were  ma- 
naged by  Olympius  at  his  own  pleasure  and  inclination.  He  also 
possessed  the  office  of  Magister,  or  governor  of  the  court,  while 
the  other  offices  were  disposed  of  by  the  emperor  at  his  recom- 
mendation. Meanwhile,  not  only  all  the  friends  of  Stilico,  but 
all  others  who  had  any  regard  for  him,  were  searched  out. 
Among  tjiese,  Duterius,  who  commanded  the  guard  of  the  impe- 
rial bed-chamber,  was  examined,  as  was  likewise  Petrus,  tribune 
of  the  Notarii.  These  were  publicly  put  to  the  torture  to  force 
them  to  some  confession  relative  to  Stilico;  yet  as  they  would 
slate  nothing  either  against  him  or  themselves,  Olympius  was  dis- 
appointed of  his  views.  He,  however,  caused  them  to  be  beat  to 
death  with  cudgels.  Although  many  others,  who  were  suspected 
of  being  the  adherents  of  Stilico,  and  acquainted  with  his  designs, 
were  examined  and  put  to  torture  to  induce  them  to  confess  a 
knowledge  of  his  ambition  to  be  emperor;  yet  since  none  of  them 
would  make  such  a  confession,  the  inquirers  at  length  desisted 
trora  their  enterprise.  In  ihe  mean  time,,  the  emperor  Ilonorius 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


commanded  his  wife  Thermantia  to  be  taken  from  the  imperial 
throne,  and  to  be  restored  to  her  mother,  who  notwithstanding 
was  without  suspicion.  He  likewise  ordered  Eucherius,  the  sou 
of  Stilico,  to  be  searched  for  and  put  to  death.  Having  found  him 
in  a  church  at  Rome,  to  which  he  had  fled  for  refuge,  they  did 
not  molest  him,  through  respect  to  the  place.  At  the  same  time, 
Heliocrates,  the  treasurer,  produced  in  Rome  the  emperor's  letter, 
commanding  the  confiscation  of  the  property  of  all  who  had  borne 
any  office  in  the  time  of  Stilico.  But  as  if  all  these  circum- 
stances were  not  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  evil  genius  that  held  man- 
kind  in  bonds  of  wickedness,  and  confounded  all  things  through 
the  neglect  of  sacred  observances,  the  former  disasters  were 
heightened  by  an  additional  one,  which  thus  happened. 

The  soldiers  who  were  in  the  city,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of 
Stilico,  fell  upon  all  the  women  and  children  in  the  city,  who  be- 
longed to  the  Barbarians.  Having,  as  by  a  preconcerted  signal, 
destroyed  every  individual  of  them,  they  plundered  them  of  all 
they  possessed.  When  this  was  known  to  the  relations  of  those 
who  were  murdered,  they  assembled  together  from  all  quarters. 
Being  highly  incensed  against  the  Romans  for  so  .impious  a  breach 
of  the  promises  they  had  made  in  the  presence  of  the  gods, 
they  all  resolved  to  join  with  Alaric,  and  to  assist  him  in  a  war 
against  Rome.  Having  therefore  collected  to  the  number  of  thirty 
thousand  men,  they  fixed  themselves  in  whatever  place  they 
pleased.  But  Alaric  was  not  sufficiently  excited  even  by  these 
men  to  undertake  a  war,  but  still  preferred  peace,  being  still 
mindful  of  the  league  into  which  he  -had  entered  with  Stilico. 
He  therefore  sent  ambassadors  with  a  desire  to  procure  a  peace, 
even  if  he  acquired  for  it  but  a  small  sum  of  money.  He  like- 
wise desired  Mtius  and  Jason,  the  former  son  to  Jovius,  and  the 
latter  to  Gaudentius,  as  hostages  ;  and  offered  to  send  them  two 
from  among  his  own  nobility  under  similar  circumstances.  A 
peace  being  made  on  those  terms,  he  would  lead  his  army  out  of 
Noricum  into  Pannonia.  When  Alaric  demanded  peace  on  those 
conditions,  the  emperor  refused  to  grant  it,  although  if  he  would 
have  disposed  of  his  affairs  with  prudence,  he  must  have  chosen 
one  of  two  alternatives  that  were  before  him.  He  ought  either 
to  have  deferred  the  war,  and  to  have  procured  a  peace  by  a  small 
sum,  or  if  he  preferred  to  contend,  he  should  have  collected  to- 
gether as  many  legions  as  possible,  and  have  posted  them  in  the 
rcute  of  the  enemy,  to  obstruct  the  Barbarians  from  advancing 
any  further.  He  should  likewise  have  chosen  a  proper  person 
to  lead  them,  and  have  conferred  the  command  on  Sarus,  who 

YOL.  1.  NO.  3.  X 


i(>«  THE  HISTOnV  BOOK  v. 

alone  was  sufficient  to  strike  terror  into  the  enemy,  both  by  means 
of  his  intrepidity,  and  of  his  experience  in  warlike  affairs;  who 
had  also  under  him  a  force  of  Barbarians  sufficient  to  make  a 
good  defence.  The  emperor,  on  the  contrary,  neither  accepting 
the  offers  of  peace,  making  Sarus  his  friend,  nor  collecting  tire 
Roman  army,  but  placing  all  his  dependance  on  Olympius,  oc- 
casioned the  innumerable  calamities  by  which  the  commonwealth 
was  overwhelmed.  For  the  command  was  bestowed  on  such 
persons  as  were  contemptible  in  the  opinion  of  the  enemy.  Tur- 
pilio  was  appointed  commander  of  the  cavalry,  Varanes  of  the 
infantry,  Vigilantius  of  the  domestic  forces.  For  these  reasons 
all  persons  were  in  despair,  and  thought  the  complete  destruction 
of  Italy  even  then  before  their  eyes. 

As  affairs  were  thus  ordered,  Alaric  began  his  expedition  against 
Rome,  and  ridiculed  the  preparations  made  by  Honorius.  Being 
unwilling  to  enter  on  so  important  an  affair  with  not  more  than 
nearly  equal  forces  to  his  enemy,  he  sent  for  Ataulphus,  his 
wife's  brother,  from  the  upper  Pannonia,  to  share  with  him  in 
the  enterprize,  he  having  under  him  a  very  considerable  force  of 
Goths  and  Huns.  However,  he  did  not  wait  for  the  arrival  of  his 
brother-in-law,  but  marching  forward  with  expedition,  passed  by 
Aquileia  and  the  other  cities  beyond  the  Po,  namely  Concordia, 
Altinum,  and  Cremona.  When  he  had  crossed  that  river,  being 
as  it  were  at  some  festival,  and  having  no  enemy  to  obstruct  him, 
he  arrived  at  a  castle  of  Bononia,  called  Occuparia.  From  thence, 
passing  through  all  ^Emilia,  and  leaving  Ravenna  in  his  rear,  he 
advanced  to  Ariminum,  a  great  city  of  Flaminia.  Moving  by 
that  likewise  with  haste,  and  by  all  the  other  towns  of  that  pro- 
vince, he  came  to  Picenum,  which  is  situated  at  the  extremity  of 
the  Ionian  bay.  From  thence  marching  towards  Rome,  he  sacked 
all  the  castles  and  towns  in  his  way.  Thus  if  Arsacius  and  Ta- 
rentius,  the  two  eunuchs,  had  not  hastened  to  bring  Eucherius, 
the  son  of  Stilico,  from  those  quarters  to  Rome  to  be  executed 
according  to  the  command  of  the  emperor,  the  youth  would  cer- 
tainly have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Alaric,  and  would  have  been 
saved.  The  eunuchs  having  fulfilled  the  injunctions  laid  on  them 
to  that  effect,  and  having  delivered  Thermantia,  the  wife  of  Ho- 
norius, to  her  mother,  went  by  sea  to  the  emperor  in  Gallia  Cel- 
tica,  where  he  then  resided,  because  they  were  not  able  to  go  to 
him  by  the  same  way  they  had  come.  For  these  reasons,  the  em- 
peror conceiving  that  he  should  render  good  service  to  the  com- 
mon-wealth by  rewarding  these  two  eunuchs  for  their  great  ex- 
ploits in  restoring  Thermantia  to  her  mother,  and  in  putting  to 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  163 

death  Eucherius,  appointed  Tarentius  imperial  chamberlain,  and 
gave  the  next  post  under  him  to  Arsacius.  Having  then  cut  off 
Bathanarius,  who  was  commander  of  the  troops  in  the  greater 
Libya,  and  had  married  the  sister  of  Stilico,  he  gave  that  com- 
mand to  Heraclianus,  the  person  who  had  killed  Stilico,  and  who 
received  this  honour  as  the  recompense  of  his  action. 

When  Alaric  was  near  Rome,  besieging  its  inhabitants,  the  se- 
nate suspected  Serena  of  bringing  the  Barbarians  against  their  city. 
The  whole  senate  therefore,  with  Placidia,  uterine  sister  to  the 
emperor,  thought  it  proper  that  she  should  suffer  death,  for  being 
the  cause  of  the  present  calamity.  They  observed,  that  "Alaric, 
upon  Serena  being  removed,  will  retire  from  the  city,  because  no 
person  will  remain  by  whom  he  can  hope  the  town  to  jzfe  betrayed 
into  his  hands.'*  This  suspicion  was  in  reality  groundless,  as 
Serena  never  had  any  such  intentions.  However  she  suffered 
justly  for  her  impieties  toward  the  gods,  which  I  am  now  about 
to  relate.  When  the  elder  Theodosius,  after  defeating  the  rebel 
Eugenius,  arrived  at  Rome,  and  occasioned  in  all  persons  a  con- 
tempt and  neglect  of  divine  worship,  by  refusing  to  defray  the 
charge  of  the  holy  rites  from  the  public  funds,  the  priests  of  both 
sexes  were  dismissed  and  banished,  and  the  temples  were  de- 
prived of  sacrifices.  Serena,  insulting  the  deities  with  derision, 
was  determined  to  see  the  temple  dedicated  to  the  mother  of  the 
gods.  In  this  perceiving  some  ornaments  around  the  neck  of  the 
statue  of  Rhea,  suitable  to  the  divine  worship  that  was  paid  to 
her,  she  took  them  off  the  statue,  and  placed  them  upon  her  own 
neck.  An  aged  woman,  who  was  the  only  one  remaining  of  the 
vestal  virgins,  upbraided  her  severely  for  so  impious  an  action. 
Serena  not  only  returned  very  violent  language,  but  commanded 
her  attendants  to  drive  or  carry  her  away.  Notwithstanding,  the 
old  woman,  as  she  was  leaving  the  place,  prayed  that  whatever 
was  due  to  such  impiety  might  fall  on  Serena,  her  husband,  and 
children.  Serena  did  not  notice  what  she  had  said,  but  left  the 
temple  pleased  with  the  ornaments  she  had  obtained.  Yet  after- 
wards she  was  frequently  visited  by  an  appearance,  not  only  imagi- 
nary, in  her  dreams,  but  real,  when  she  was  awake,  which  predicted 
her  death.  Other  persons  likewise  beheld  the  same  appearance. 
So  far  did  that  just  power  of  vengeance,  whose  office  it  is  to 
punish  the  wicked,  discharge  itsduty,  that  although  Serena  knew 
what  would  happen,  she  was  without  caution,  and  submitted  that 
neck  which  she  had  decorated  with  the  attire  of  the  goddess,  even 
to  a  halter.  It  is  likewise  said  that  Stilico,  for  an  impiety  not  much 
unlike  this  of  which  Serena  was  guilty,  did  not  escape  thesecret. 
band  of  vengeance.  He  is  said  to  have  commanded  the  doors 


THE  HISTORY  COOK  v. 


of  the  capitol  to  be  stripped  of  a  large  quantity  of  gold  with 
which  they  were  covered.  They  who  were  employed  in  that 
act  found  on  some  part  of  the  doors  this  inscription,  "  These  am 
reserved  for  a  wretched  prince."  The  veracity  of  the  prediction 
contained  in  this  inscription  was  proved,  for  he  indeed  died  in 
the  most  wretched  and  miserable  manner. 

However,  the  death  of  Serena  did  not  remove  Alaric  from  the 
siege,  but  he  blocked  up  the  gates  all  round,  and  having  possessed 
himself  of  the  river  Tiber,  prevented  the  arrival  of  necessaries 
from  the  port  to  the  city.  The  Romans,  on  perceiving  this,  still 
resolved  to  persevere  in  their  defence,  expecting  daily  to  receive 
auxiliaries  from  Ravenna.  But  none  coming  to  their  assistance, 
and  being  disappointed  in  their  hopes,  they  diminished  the  al- 
lowance of  grain,  and  ordered  that  not  more  than  half  of  the  for- 
mer quantity  of  provisions  should  be  dressed  each  day  ;  and  after- 
wards when  the  scarcity  increased,  only  a  third  part.  Receiving 
no  relief,  and  all  their  provisions  being  consumed,  the  famine,  as 
might  be  expected,  was  succeeded  by  a  pestilence,  and  all  places 
were  filled  with  dead  bodies.  As  the  dead  could  not  be  interred 
outside  the  city,  for  the  enemy  was  in  possession  of  all  the  ave- 
nues, the  city  was  made  their  sepulchre.  Thus  it  was  in  danger 
of  being  depopulated  by  an  additional  cause,  and  though  no  want 
of  provisions  had  subsisted,  yet  the  stench  arising  from  the  pu- 
trid corpses  was  sufficient  to  infect  them  with  disease.  Laeta,the 
wife  of  the  late  emperor  Gratian,  and  her  mother  Pissamena, 
stipplied  great  numbers  with  food  for  some  time.  For  since  they 
were  allowed  from  the  treasury  the  provisions  of  an  imperial  table, 
through  the  generosity  of  Theodosius,  who  had  conferred  on  them 
that  privilege,  many  received  the  bounty  of  these  two  ladies,  and 
obtained  from  their  house  what  preserved  them  from  famine. 
But  the  distress  was  arrived  to  such  extremity,  that  they  were  in- 
danger  of  being  eaten  by  each  other.  They  tried  all  methods  of 
support,  which  are  abominable  in  the  eyes  of  all  mankind.  They 
then  resolved  on  sending  an  embassy  to  the  enemy,  to  inform  him 
that  they  were  willing'  to  accept  any  reasonable  conditions  of 
peace,  and  at  the  same  time  were  ready  for  war,  since  the  people 
of  Rome  had  taken  up  arms,  and  by  means  of  continual  military 
exercise  were  become  well  disposed  for  action.  Ba&ilius  was  ap- 
pointed their  ambassador,  who  was  a  Spaniard,  and  governor  of  a 
province.  Johannes,  the  chief  of  the  imperial  notaries,  went  with 
bim,  because  he  was  acquainted  with  Alaric,  and  might  be  the 
means  of  effecting  a  reconciliation.  The  Romans  did  not  cer- 
tainly know  whether  Alaric  himself  was  present  or  not,  or  whether 


BOOK  v.  OF   ZOSIMUS. 


it  was  he  who  besieged  the  city.  For  they  were  deluded  by  a  re- 
port that  it  was  another  person,  who  had  been  a  friend  of  Stilico, 
which  had  occasioned  him  to  come  against  their  city. 

When  the  ambassadors  came  to  him,  they  were  ashamed  of  the 
ignorance   in  which  the  Romans  had  so  long  remained,  but  de- 
livered the  message  of  the  senate.     When  Alaric  heard  it,  and, 
that  the  people  having  been  exercised  to  arms  were  ready  for  • 
war,  he  remarked,  "  The  thickest  grass  is  more  easy  to  cut  than; 
the  thinnest."     Having  said  this,  he  laughed  immoderately  at  the 
ambassadors.     But  when  they  spoke  of  peace,  he  used  such  ex- 
pressions as  were  in  the  extreme  of  arrogance  and  presumption., 
He  declared,   that   he    would  not  relinquish  the  siege  on   apy 
condition  but  that  of  receiving  all  the  gold  and  silver  in  the  city, 
all  the  household  goods,  and  the  Barbarian  slaves.     One  of  the 
ambassadors  observing,  "  If  you  take  all  these,  what  will  you. 
leave  for  the  citizens  r"     He  replied,  "  Their  Souls."     When  the 
ambassadors  received  this  answer,  they  desired  time  to  commu- 
nicate it  to  the  citizens,  and  to  consult  with  them  in  what  manner 
they  should  act     Having  obtained  that  permission,  they  related 
all  the  conversation   that  had  passed  in    their  embassy.     On  this 
the  Romans,  being  convinced  that  it  was  really  Alaric   who  at- 
tacked them,  and  despairing  therefore  of  all  things  that  conduce 
to  human  strength,  called  to  mind  the  aid  which  the  city  had  for- 
merly met  with   in  emergencies  ;  and  that  they,  by  transgressing 
their  ancient  institutions,  were  now  left  destitute  of  it. 

While  they  were  occupied  in  these  reflections,  Pompeianus, 
the  prefect  of  the  city,  accidentally  met  with  some  persons  who 
were  come  to  Rome  from  Tuscany,  and  related  that  a  town  called 
Neveia  had  delivered  itself  from  extreme  danger,  the  Barbarians 
having  been  repulsed  from  it  by  storms  of  thunder  and  lightning, 
which  was  caused  by  the  devotion  of  its  inhabitants  to  the  gods, 
in  the  ancient  mode  of  worship.  Having  discoursed  with  these 
men,  he  performed  all  that  was  in  his  power  according  to  the 
books  of  the  chief  priests.  Recollecting,  however,  the  opinions 
that  were  then  prevalent,  he  resolved  to  proceed  with  greater 
caution,  and  proposed  the  whole  aflair  to  the  bishop  of  the  city, 
whose  name  was  Innocentius.  Preferring  the  preservation  of  the. 
city  to  his  own  private  opinion,  he  gave  them  permission  to  do 
privately  whatever  they  knew  to  be  convenient.  They  declared 
however  that  what  they  were  able  to  do  would  be  of  no  utility, 
unless  the  public  and  customary  sacrifices  were  performed,  and 
unless  the  senate  ascended  to  the  capitol,  performing  there,  and 
in  the  different  markets  of  the  city,  all  that  was  essential.  But/ 


§66  THE  HISTORY BOOK  v. 

no  person  daring  to  join  in  the  ancient  religious  ordinances,  they 
dismissed  the  men  who  were  come  from  Tuscany,  and  applied 
themselves  to  the  endeavouring  to  appease  the  Barbarians  in  the 
best  possible  manner.  With  this  design  they  again  sent  ambas- 
sadors.. After  long  discussions  on  both  sides,  it  was  at  length 
agreed,  that  the  city  should  give  live  thousand  pounds  of  gold, 
and  thirty  thousand  of  silver,  four  thousand  silk  robes,  three 
thousand  scarlet  fleeces,  and  three  thouand  pounds  of  pepper. 
As  the  city  possessed  no  public  stock,  it  was  necessary  for  the 
senators  who  had  property,  to  undertake  the  collection  by  an 
assessment.  Palladius  was  empowered  to  rate  every  person  ac- 
cording to  his  estate,  but  was  not  able  to  complete  the  whole- 
sum  out  of  all,  either  because  many  persons  concealed  part  of 
their  property,  or  because  the  city  was  impoverished,  throughthe 
avarice  and  unceasing  exactions  of  the  magistrates  appointed  by 
the  emperor.  The  evil  genius,  who  at  that  time  presided  over 
the  human  race,  then  incited  the  persons  employed  in  this  trans- 
action to  the  highest  pitch  of  wickedness.  They  resolved  to 
supply  the  deficiency  from  the  ornaments  that  were  about  the 
statues  of  the  gods.  This  was  in  effect  only  rendering  inanimate 
and  inefficacious  those  images,  which  had  been  fixed  up,  and 
dedicated  to  sacred  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  were  decorated  with 
precious  attire,  for  preserving  the  city  in  perpetual  felicity.  And 
since  every  thing  then  conspired  to  the  ruin  of  the  city,  they  not 
only  robbed  the  statues  of  their  ornaments,  but  also  melted  down 
some  of  them  that  were  made  of  gold  and  silver.  Among  these 
was  that  of  Valour  or  Fortitude,  which  the  Romans  call  Virtus. 
This  being  destroyed,  all  that  remained  of  the  Roman  valour  and 
intrepidity  was  totally  extinguished ;  according  to  the  remarks  of 
persons  who  were  skilled  in  sacred  rites  and  observances. 
.  The  money  being  thus  raised,  they  thought  it  advisable  to  send 
an  envoy  to  the  emperor  to  confer  with  him  concerning  the  en- 
guing  treaty,  and  to  inform  him  that  Alaric  required,  not  only 
money,  but  the  sons  of  certain  noblemen  as  hostages;  being  wil- 
ling on  these  conditions  to  make  peace,  and  likewise  to  enter  into 
an  alliance  with  the  emperor,  and  to  assist  the  Romans  against  all 
their  enemies.  The  emperor  resolving  to  conclude  a  peace,  the 
money  was  paid  to  the  Barbarians.  This  being  done,  Alaric 
gave  the  citizens  a  free  market  for  three  successive  days,  with 
permission  to  pass  securely  through  certain  gates  of  the  city,  and 
to  bring  corn  from  the  port.  By  these  means  the  citizens  having 
a  little  recovered  breath,  by  selling  the  remainder  of  their  goods,. 
or  exchanging  one  article  for  another,  to  purchase  necessaries  i 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  167 

the  barbarians  departed  from  Rome,  and  pitched  their  camps  in 
several  places  in  Tuscany.  Almost  ail  the  slaves  in  Rome  then 
4Ied  from  the  city,  and  enrolled  themselves  among  the  barbarians, 
to  the  number  of  forty  thousand.  Some  of  the  straggling  bar- 
barians attacked  the  Romans  who  were  going  down  to  the  port, 
and  bringing  up  their  provisions.  When  Alaric  understood  this, 
he  used  his  utmost  endeavours  to  prevent  such  proceedings,  which 
were  without  his  knowledge  or  consent.  The  Romans  now  ap- 
peared to  possess  a  small  respite,  from  their  misfortunes.  The  em- 
peror Honorius  was  now  entering  on  the  consulship,  having  en- 
joyed that  honour  eight  times,  and  the  emperor  Theodosius  in 
the  east  three  times.  At  this  juncture  the  rebel  Constantine  sent 
some  clinches  to  Honorius,  to  intreat  pardon  from  him  for  having 
accepted  of  the  empire.  When  the  emperor  heard  this  petition, 
perceiving  that  it  was  not  easy  for  him,  since  Alaric  and  his  bar- 
barians were  so  near,  to  prepare  for  other  wars  ;  and  consulting 
the  safety  of  his  relations  who  were  in  the  hands  of  the  rebel, 
whose  names  were  Verenianus  and  Didymius ;  he  not  only  granted 
his  request,  but  likewise  sent  him  an  imperial  robe.  But  his  care 
for  his  relations  was  in  vain,  they  having  been  put  to  death  before 
this  embassy.  Having  done  this,  he  sent  home  the  eunuchs. 

The  peace  with  Alaric  being  not  yet  confirmed,  as  the  empe- 
ror had  neither  given  him  the  hostages,  nor  complied  with  all  his 
desires,  the  senate  sent  Cecilianus,  Attalus,  and  Maximianus,  on  an 
embassy  to  Ravenna.  Although  these  persons  made  a  lamentable 
representation  of  the  miseries  which  Rome  had  endured,  and 
described  the  number  who  had  tragically  perished;  yet  they  de- 
rived no  benefit  from  it,  because  Olympius  kept  all  in  a  confused 
state,  and  impeded  the  due  course  of  affairs.  From  this  cause 
the  emperor  dismissed  the  ambassadors  without  having  effected 
the  purpose  of  their  mission  ;  and  discharged  Theodorus  from 
his  office  of  prefect  of  the  city,  giving  it  to  Cecilianus,  and  ap- 
pointed Attalus  to  be  treasurer.  As  Olympius  was  wholly 
intent  on  searching  all  places  for  those  who  were  reported  to  have 
any  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  Stilico,  several  persons  were 
called  in  question  on  false  accusations.  Among  these  were  Mar- 
cellianus  and  Salonius,  two  brothers,  belonging  to  the  imperial 
Notaries.  These  two  were  delivered  by  Olympius  to  the  prefect 
of  the  court.  Though  by  his  order  they  were  beaten  and  used 
with  every  severity,  yet  they  made  not  the  smallest  disclosure 
such  as  Olympius  was  anxious  to  obtain  from  them. 
.  The  affairs  of  Rome  being  now  in  no  better  condition  than 
before,  the  emperor  sent  for  five  regirnents  of  soldiers,  who  were 


168  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  v. 

quartered  in  Dalmatia,  to  guard  the  city  of  Rome.     These  regi- 
ments consisted  of  six  thousand  men,  who  for  strength-  and  dis- 
cipline were  the  flower  of  the  whole  Roman  army.     Their  gene- 
ral was  Valens,  a  person  ready  for  tbe  greatest  and  most  hazardous 
enterprizes.     He  disdained,  therefore,  to  appear  so  cowardly  as  to 
march  by  a  way  that  was  not  guarded  by  the  enemy.     Thus  Ala* 
ric,  delaying  until  he  came  up  to  him,  and  attacking  him  with  all 
his  forces,  cut  off  all  his  troops,  except  a  hundred,  who  with 
much  difficulty  escaped,  together  with  their  commander.     He 
arrived  in  safety  at  Rome,  together  with  Attalus,  whom  the  senate 
had  sent  to  the  emperor.     Perceiving  that  the  public  calamities 
were  accumulating,  Attalus,  on  his  arrival  at  Rome,  dismissed 
Heliocrates  from  the  office  which  the  emperor  had  been  induced 
to  confer  on  him  by  the  persuasions  of  Olympius.     Heliocrates 
was  employed  to  make  an  inquisition  into  the  estates  of  those  who 
were  banished  on  account  of  their  acquaintance  with  or  relation  to 
Stilico,  and  to  make  a  return  of  them  to  the  treasury.     But  he 
being  a  man  of  great  moderation,  and  of  good  disposition,  con- 
sidered it  an  impiety  to  insult  the  unfortunate;  and  therefore  did 
not  make  strict  enquiries,  but  on  the  contrary  sent  private  no- 
tice to  many  of  the  parties  to    conceal  what  they  were   abta, 
Being  for  this  reason  considered  a  worthless  person,  he  was  seized 
*nd  carried  to  Ravenna,  to  suffer  for  his  humanity  towards  the 
unfortunate.  He  would  undoubtedly  have  died  for  it,  through  the 
cruelty  which  then  prevailed,  had  he  not  wisely  fled  to  a  church 
belonging  to  the  Christians.     Maximilianus,  having  fallen  into 
the  hands.of  the  enemy,  was  redeemed  by  his  father,  Marinianus, 
with  thirty  thousand  pieces  of  gold.     For  since  the  emperor  de- 
ferred the  peace,  and  did  not  fulfil  what  had  been  agreed  on,  the 
Romans  could  no  longer  pass  freely  out  of  the  city.     The  senate 
therefore  a  second  time  sent  ambassadors  to  the  emperor  concern- 
ing the  peace,  along  with  whom  the  bishop  of  Rome  also  went. 
There  were  in  their  retinue  some  barbarians,  whom  Alaric  sent  to 
protect  them  from  their  enemies  who  infested  the  different  roads. 
When  these    ambassadors   were    arrived  with  the   emperor, 
Ataulphus,  for  whom  Alaric  had  sent,  as  I  before  mentioned,  had 
crossed  the  Alps,  between  Pannonia  and  Venice.     When  the  em- 
peror heard  of  his  approach,  and  that  he  had  with  him  an  incon- 
siderable force,  he  ordered  all  his  troops  both  horse  and  foot, 
which  were  in  the  different  towns,  to  march  under  their  own  of- 
ficers to  meet  him.     To  Olympius,  who  was  commander  of  the 
court  guards,  he  gave  the  Huns  who  were  in  Ravenna,  amounting 
to  three  hundred,    These  finding  the  enemy  had  arrived  at  Pisa, 


JKIOK  y,  OF  ZOSIMUS. 


attacked  them,  killed  eleven  hundred  Goths,  and  returned  in 
safety  to  Ravenna^  with  the  loss  of  only  seventeen  men. 

The  eunuchs  of  the  court  now  laid  before  the  emperor  infor- 
aiations  charging  Olyrnplus  as  the  occasion  of  all  the  disasters, 
which  had  happend  to  the  commonwealth,  and  thus  procured 
his  removal  from  the  office  he  then  held.  On  this,  fearing  some 
greater  misfortune,  he  fled  into  Dalmatia.  In  the  meantime,  the 
emperor  sent  Attalus,  the  prefect  of  the  city,  to  Rome  ;  and  be- 
ing very  solicitous  that  nothing  belonging  to  the  treasury  should 
be  concealed,  he  also  sent  Demetrius  to  assist  Attalus,  and  made 
diligent  inquiry  into  the  public  funds.  After  making  many  inno- 
vations in  the  magistracy,  and  in  other  respects;  discharging  those 
who  were  previously  in  high  authority,  and  bestowing  their'  of- 
fices on  others;  he  appointed  Generidus  commander  of  the  forces 
in  Dalmatia,  who  already  held  the  chief  command  of  those  sta- 
tioned in  the  upper  Pannonia,  Noricum,  and  Rhaetia,  as  far  as 
the  Alps.  This  Generidus,  although  of  Barbarian  extraction, 
was  in  disposition  inclined  to  all  virtues,  and  was  remarkably 
.devoid  of  covetousness.  While  he  adhered  to  ancient  ordinances, 
and  could  not  endure  to  relinquish  the  old  mode  of  worshipping 
the  gods,  a  law  was  promulgated,  prohibiting  all  who  were  »ot 
Christians  from  wearing  a  girdle  in  the  court.  This  law  being 
established,  Generidus,  who  was  at  that  time  a  military  officer  in 
Rome,  laid  aside  his  girdle,  and  remained  in  his  own  house.  The 
emperor  requiring  him,  as  one  enrolled  among  the  officers,  to  at- 
tend at  court  in  his  due  course,  he  replied  that  there  was  a  law 
which  forbad  him  the  use  of  a  girdle,  or  that  any  one  should  be 
reckoned  among  the  officers  who  did  not  reverence  the  Christian 
religion.  The  emperor  answered,  that  the  law  indeed  was  obli- 
gatory on  all  others,  but  excepted  him  alone,  who  had  undertaken 
such  dangerous  enterprizes  for  the  commonwealth.  Generidus 
said  in  reply,  that  he  could  not  suffer  himself  toaccept  of  an  ho- 
nour that  appeared  to  affront  all  who  by  means  of  that  law  had" 
been  put  out  of  commission.  Nor  did  he  execute  his  office,  un- 
til the  emperor,  compelled  both  by  necessity  and  shame,  com- 
pletely abolished  the  law,  and  gave  all  persons  liberty  of  enjoying 
their  own  sentiments  in  all  offices,  whether  civil  or  military. 

Generidus,  having  commenced  with  this  act  of  gallantry,  em- 
ployed and  instructed  the  soldiers  with  continual  labour  and  ex- 
ercise. He  distributed  corn  among  them,  suffering  no  person  to 
deprive  them  of  any  part  of  it,  as  was  formerly  the  practise.  He 
likewise  gave  suitable  recompenses  out  of  his  own  public  allow- 
ance to  those  who  w-sre  most  deserving.  Appearing  therefore  thua 

TOL.  I,  .MO.  3,  y 


170  THE  HISTORY  ROOK  v. 

great,  he  was  not  only  a  terror  to  the  adjacent  barbarians,  but  a 
security  to  the  nations  which  were  under  his  care.  The  soldiers 
at  Ravenna,  having  mutinied,  took  possession  of  the  port,  and 
with  rude  clamours  demanded  the  emperor  to  come  before  them. 
But  he,  through  dread  of  the  tumult,  having  secreted  himself, 
Jovius  issued  among  them,  who  was  prefect  of  the  court,  and 
honoured  with  the  rank  of  a  patrician.  Pretending  to  be  ignorant 
of  the  occasion  for  which  they  mutinied,  although  he  himself  was 
said  to  be  the  author  of  it,  together  with  Illebichus,  who  com- 
manded the  domestic  cavalry,  he  asked  them  their  reason  for  be- 
ing so  violent.  On  hearing  the  soldiers  reply,  that  they  must 
deliver  into  their  hands  Turpillio  and  Vigilantius,  the  two  ge- 
nerals, with  Terentius,  the  imperial  chamberlain,  and  Arsacius, 
next  to  him  in  dignity,  the  emperor  fearing  an  insurrection  of 
the  soldiers  condemned  the  two  generals  to  perpetual  exile.  They 
being  therefore  placed  on  board  a -ship,  were  murdered  by  those 
who  were  appointed  to  carry  them  to  the  place  of  banishment. 
Jovius  indeed  had  commanded  them  to  do  this;  fearing  lest  if 
they  should  ever  return,  and  discover  the  intrigue  that  was  formed 
against  them,  they  might  excite  the  emperor  to  punish  him  for 
it.  Terentius  was  sent  into  the  east,  and  Arsacius  was  ordered 
to  reside  in  Milan.  The  emperor  having  made  Eusebius  cham* 
berlain  in  lieu  of  Terentius,  given  the  command  which  Turpillio 
had  held  to  Valens,  and  appointed  Illebichus  prefect  instead 
of  Vigilantius,  appeared  in  some  measure  to  mitigate  the  rage  of 
the  soldiers. 

Jovius,  having  now  transferred  all  the  power  of  managing  the 
emperor  into  his  own  hands,  resolved  to  send  ambassadors  to 
Alaric,  to  desire  him  to  come  even  to  Ravenna,  and  to  tell  him 
that  they  would  there  conclude  the  peace.  Alaric,  being  prevailed 
on  by  the  letters  he  received  both  from  the  emperor  and  Jovius, 
and  being  advanced  as  far  as  A  riminum,  thirty  miles  fiom  Raven- 
na, Jovius  hastened  thither  also-(havjng  been  the  friend  and  fami- 
liar acquaintance  of  Alaric  in  Epirus),  totreat  concerning  the  alli- 
ance. Thedemands  of  Alaric  were ;  acertain  quantity  of  gold  each 
year,  and  a  quantity  of  corn ;  and  that  himself  and  the  Barbarians 
who  were  with  him  should  inhabit  both  the  Venetias,  Noricum, 
and  Dalmatia.  Jovius,  having  written  these  demands  in  presence 
of  Alaric,  sent  them  to  the  emperor,  with  other  letters  which  he 
privately  conveyed  to  him,  to  advise  him  to  appoint  Alaric  com- 
mander of  both  his  armies,  by  which  means  he  might  be  induced 
to  relax  the  severity  of  his  conditions,  and  make  a  peace  on  to- 
)erably  moderate  terms.  When  the  emperor  received  this  letter, 


BOOK  v.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  171 


he  condemned  Jovius  for  his  forward  temerity,  and  wrote  to  him, 
telling  him,  that  it  was  proper  for  him,  as  prefect  of  the  court, 
and  understanding  what  the  public  revenues  were  capable  of,  to 
assign  the  quantity  of  corn  and  gold,  but  that  no  dignity  or  com- 
mand should  ever  be  conferred  on  Alaric,  or  any  of  his  family. 

When  Jovius  received  this  letter,  he  opened  and  read  it  in  the 
hearing  of  Alaric  ;  who  though  he  bore  all  the  rest  with  patience, 
yet  on  finding  the  command  denied  to  himself  and  all  his  family, 
was  so  enraged,  that  he  immediately  commanded  his  Barbarians 
to  march  to  Rome  with  the  greatest  expedition,  and  there  revenge 
the  affront  offered  to  him  and  all  his  family.  Jovius  being  dis- 
appointed on  seeing  the  emperor's  unexpected  letter,  returned  to 
Ravenna.  Being  desirous  to  acquit  himself  of  all  blame,  he  bound 
Honorius  under  several  oaths  never  to  make  peace  with  Alaric, 
but  to  wage  against  him  a  continual  war  ;  which  he  himself  like- 
wise swore  by  touching  the  head  of  the  emperor,  and  caused  all 
others  who  were  in  office  to  do  the  same. 

Affairs  having  thus  been  concerted,  the  emperor  called  ten 
thousand  Huns  to  his  assistance  in  the  war  against  Alaric.  In  or- 
der that  he  might  have  provisions  ready  for  them  on  their  arrival, 
he  ordered  the  Dalmatians  to  bring  corn,  sheep,  and  oxen.  He 
sent  out  scouts  to  gain  information  of  the  way  by  which  Alaric 
intended  to  march  to  Rome.  But  Alaric,  in  the  mean  time,  re- 
pented of  his  intention  of  proceeding  against  Rome,  and  sent  the 
bishops  of  each  city,  not  only  as  ambassadors,  but  also  to  advise 
the  emperor  not  to  suffer  so  noble  a  city,  which  for  more  than  a 
thousand  years  had  ruled  over  great  part  of  the  world,  to  be  seized 
and  destroyed  by  the  Barbarians,  nor  such  magnificent  edifices 
to  be  demolished  by  hostile  flames,  but  to  prefer  entering  into  a 
peace  on  some  reasonable  conditions.  He  instructed  them  to  state 
to  the  emperor,  that  the  Barbarians  wanted  no  preferments,  nor 
did  he  now  desire  the  provinces  which  he  had  previously  chosen 
as  his  residence,  but  only  the  two  Norica,  which  are  situated  on 
the  extremity  of  the  river  Danube,  are  harassed  by  continual  in- 
cursions, and  yield  to  the  treasury  a  very  small  revenue.  Besides 
this  he  only  demanded  annually  as  much  corn  as  the  emperor 
should  think  proper  to  grant,  and  would  remit  the  gold.  And 
that  a  friendship  and  alliance  should  subsist  between  himself  and 
the  Romans,  against  every  one  that  should  rise  to  oppose  the  em- 
pire. When  Alaric  had  made  these  extremely  temperate  proposi- 
tions, his  moderation  being  universally  admired,  Jovius,  and  the 
other  ministers  of  the  emperor,  declared  that  his  demands  could 
Hot  possibly  be  acceded  to,  since  all  persons,  who  held  any  com- 


17*  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  vf. 

mission,  had  sworn  not  to  make  peace  with  Alaric.  For  if  their 
oath  had  been  made  to  the  deity,  they  might  indeed  probably  have 
dispensed  with  it,  and  have  relied  on  the  divine  good  .less  for  par- 
don ;  but  since  they  had  sworn  by  tbe  head  of.  the  emperor,  it 
was  by  no  means  lawful  for  them  to  infringe  so  great  a  vow.  Sa 
cautious  were  they  who  then  held  the  chief  management  of  af- 
fairs, as  they  were  destitute  of  the  care  and  protection  of  heaven. 


SIXTH  BOOK. 


ALARIC  having  thus  received  insult  in  return  for  his  reason- 
able demands,  hastened  towards  Rome  with  all  his  forces,  design- 
ing closely  to  besiege  that  city.  At  the  same  time  Jovius,  a  man 
of  great  learning  and  virtue,  came  to  Honorius  as  ambassador  from 
Constantine,  who  had  usurped  the  government  of  Gallia  Celtica, 
desiring  a  confirmation  of  the  peace  which  had  formerly  been 
agreed  on,  and  requesting  pardon  for  the  death  of  Verenianus  and 
Didymius,  who  were  relations  of  the  emperor  Honorius.  He 
pleaded  in  excuse,  that  they  were  not  killed  with  the  concurrence 
of  Constantine.  Finding  Honorius  in  great  perplexity,  he  told  him 
that  it  was  convenient  to  him  to  make  some  concessions,  since 
he  was  so  much  embarrassed  with  the  affairs  of  Italy,  and  that  if 
he  would  suffer  him  to  go  back  to  Constantine  to  inform  him  of 
the  circumstances  in  which  Italy  then  stood,  he  would  shortly 
return  with  all  the  forces  in  Celtica,  Spain,  and  Britain,  to  the  re- 
lief of  Italy  and  Rome.  On  these  conditions  Jovius  was  permit- 
ted to  depart.  »  - 

Since  I  have  not  given  a  relation  x>f  the  occurrences  in  Celtica, 
it  would  here  be  proper  to  notice  what  had  previously  taken 
place  there.  When  Arcadius  was  reigning,  Honorius  being  con- 
sul the  seventh  time  and  'Theodosius  the  second,  the  troops 
in  Britain  revolted  and  promoted  Marcus  to  the  imperial  throne, 
rendering  obedience  to  him  as  the  sovereign  in  those  countries. 
Some  time  subsequently,  having  put  him  to  death  for  not  com- 
plying with  their  inclinations,  they  set  up  Gratian,  whom  they 
presented  with  a  diadem  and  a  purple  robe,  and  attended  him  as 
an  emperor.  Being  disgusted  with  him  likewise,  they  four  months 
afterwards  deposed  and  murdered  him,  delivering  the  empire  to 
Constantine.  He  having  entrusted  to  Justinian  and  Nevigastes 
the  command  'of  the  Celtic  legions,  crossed  over  from  Britain. 
Having  arrived  at  Bononia,  which  is  the  nearest  to  the  sea-side, 
situated  in  the  lower  Germany,  and  continuing  there  some  days, 
he  conciliated  the  attachment  of  all  the  troops  between  that  place 


BOOK  vl.  OF  ZOS1MUS. 


and  the  Alps,  which  separate  Gaul  from  Italy,  thus  appearing 
now  secure  in  the  empire.  At  the  same  time  Stilicosent  Sarus  at 
the  head  of  an  army  against  Constantine.  Having  encountered 
with  the  division  commanded  by  Justinian,  he  slew  that  general 
with  the  greater  part  of  his  soldiers.  Having  acquired  great  spoils 
he  advanced  to  besiege  Valentia,  where  he  understood  that  Con- 
stantine had  placed  himself,  it  being  a  strong  city,  well  fortified 
and  a  secure  residence.  Nevigastes,  the  surviving  commander, 
having  made  overtures  of  peace  to  Sarus,  was  received  by  him  as 
a  friend.  But  Sarus,  although  he  had  both  given  and  received  an 
oath  to  the  contrary,  immediately  put  him  to  death,  without  re- 
gard to  what  he  had  sworn. 

Constantine  then  conferred  the  command,  vacant  by  the  death 
of  Justinian  and  Nevigastes,  on  Edobinchus,  a  Frank  by  extrac-* 
tion,  but  a  native  of  Britain,  and  on  Gerontius,  a  Briton.  Sarus, 
being  in  dread  of  the  courage  and  the  military  experience  of  these 
two,  raised  the  siege  of  Valentia  after  he  had  continued  in  it  seven 
days.  The  officers  of  Constantine  attacked  him  so  briskly,  that 
he  had  much  difficulty'  to  escape  with  life,  and  was  under  the 
necessity  of  giving  up  all  his  spoils  to  the  Bacaudae,  a  tribe  of 
freebooters,  to  allow  him  to  pass  into  Italy.  When  Sarus  was 
thus  safely  returned  to  Italy,  Constantine,  having  mustered  all  his 
forces,  resolved  to  place  a  sufficient  guard  orv  the  Alps  in  the  three 
passes,  which  form  the  passage  from  Italy  into  Celtica,  com- 
monly termed  the  Cottian,  the  Pennine,  and  the  maritime  Alps. 
This  was  the  reason  for  his  taking  these  precautions.  Some  years 
before,  A  read  i  us  being  in  his  sixth  consulate,  andProbus  was  his 
colleague,  the  Vandals,  uniting  with  the  Ala«niandthe  Suevi,  cros- 
sed in  these  places,  and  plundered  the  countries  beyond  the  Alps. 
Havingfwthere  occasioned  great  slaughter  they  likewise  became  so 
formidable  even  to  the  armies  in  Britain,  that  they  were  com- 
pelled, through  fear  of  their  proceeding  as  far  as  that  country, 
to  cho6se  several  usurpers,  as  Marcus,  Gratian,  and  after  them 
Constantine.  A  furious  engagement  ensued  between  them,  in 
which  the  Romans  gained  the  victory,  and  killed  most  of  the 
barbarians.  Yet  by  not  pursuing  those  who  fled,  by  which  means 
they  might  have  put  to  death  every  man,  they  gave  them  oppor- 
tunity to  rally,  and  by  collecting  an  additional  number  of  barba- 
rians, to  assume  once  more  a  fighting  posture.  For  this  cause, 
Constantine  placed  guards  in  these  places,  that  those  tribes  should 
not  have  so  free  access  into  Gaul.  He  likewise  secured  the  Rhine, 
which  had  been  neglected  since  the  time  of  the  emperor  Julian. 
Having  thus  arranged  affairs  throughout  all  Gaul,  he  decorated 


174 


THE  HISTORY  BOOK  vi. 


his  eldest  son,  Constans,  with  the  habit  of  a  Caesar,  and  sent 
him  into  Spain.  For  he  wished  to  obtain  the  absolute  sovereignty 
of  that  country,  not  only  through  the  desire  of  enlarging  his'own 
dominions,  but  of  diminishing  the  power  of  the  relations  of 
Honorius.  He  was  apprehensive,  lest  when  they  had  collected 
together  an  army  of  the  soldiers  who  were  in  that  quarter,  they 
might  on  some  occasion  cross  the  Pyrenoean  mountains  and  at- 
tack him,  while  Honorius  might  send  an  army  from  Italy,  and  by 
surrounding  him  on  every  side,  depose  him  from  his  throne. 
Constans  therefore  went  into  Spain,  having  with  him  Terentius 
as  his  general,  and  Apollinarius  as  prefect  of  his  court.  Having 
appointed  all  the  officers,  both  civil  and  military,  he  sent  his  army 
under  their  conduct  against  the  relations  of  the  emperor  Honorius, 
who  had  thrown  all  Spain  into  a  state  of  disturbance.  These  hav- 
ing commenced  the  first  assault  against  Constans  with  their  Lu- 
sitanian  soldiers,  and  finding  themselves  overpowered,  collected 
an  immense  number  of  slaves  and  peasants,  by  whose  assistance 
they  had  nearly  reduced  him  to  the  most  precarious  danger.  But 
even  in  this  emergency  their  expectations  were  frustrated,  but 
they  with  their  wives  fell  into  the  hands  of  Constans.  This  dis- 
aster being  made  known  to  their  brothers,  Theodosius  and  Lago- 
dius,  one  of  them  fled  into  Italy,  and  the  other  safely  escaped  to 
to  the  east.  After  these  achievements  in  Spain,  Constans  returned 
to  his  father,  carrying  with  him  Verenianus  and  Didymius,  and 
leaving  there  his  general  Gerontius  with  the  Gallic  troops  to 
guard  the  pass  from  Celtica  into  Spain ;  although  the  Spanish  sol- 
diers desired  that  charge  to  be  confided  to  them,  as  had  formerly 
been  the  case,  and  that  the  safety  of  their  country  might  not  be 
committed  to  the  care  of  strangers.  Verenianus  and  Didymius, 
being  brought  to  Constantine,  were  immediately  put  to  death. 

Constans  was  afterwards  a  second  time  sent  into  Spain,  and 
took  with  him  Justus  as  his  general.  Gerontius  being  dissatisfied 
at  this,  and  having  conciliated  the  favour  of  the  soldiers  in  that 
quarter,  incited  the  barbarians  who  were  in  Galiia  Celtica  to  re- 
volt against  Constantine.  Constantine  being  unable  to  withstand 
these,  the  greater  part  of  his  army  being  in  Spain,  the  barbarians 
beyond  the  Rhine  made  such  unbounded  incursions  over  every 
province,  as  to  reduce  not  only  the  Britons,  but  some  of  the  Celtic 
nations  also  to  the  necessity  of  revolting  from  the  empire,  and 
living  no  longer  under  the  Roman  laws  but  as  they  themselves 
pleased.  The  Britons  therefore  took  up  arms,  and  incurred  many 
dangerous  enterprizes  for  their  own  protection,  until  they  had 
freed  their  cities  from  the  barbarians  who  besieged  them.  In  a 


BOOK  vi.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  .  175 

similiar  manner,  the  whole  of  Armof  ica,  with  other  provinces  of 
Gaul,  delivered  themselves  by  the  same  means  ;  expelling  the  Ro- 
man magistrates  or  officers,  and  erecting  a  government,  such  as 
they  pleassd,  of  their  own. 

Thus  happened  this  revolt  or  defection  of  Britain  and  the  Cel- 
tic nations,  when  Constantine  usurped  the  empire,  by  whose  neg- 
ligent government  the  barbarians  were  emboldened  to  commit 
such  devastations.  In  the  meantime,  Alaric,  finding  that  he  could 
not  procure  a  peace  on  the  conditions  which  he  proposed,  nor  had 
received  any  hostages,  once  more  attacked  Rome,  and  threatened 
to  storm  it  if  the  citizens  refused  to  join  with  him  against  the  em- 
peror Honorius.  They  deferred  their  answer  to  this  proposal  so 
long,  that  he  besieged  the  city,  and  marching  to  the  port,  after  a 
resistance  of  some  days,  made  himself  master  of  it.  Finding  that 
all  the  stores  of  the  city  were  there,  he  threatened  to  distribute 
them  among  his  men,  unless  the  Romans  should  accede  to  his 
terms.  The  whole  senate  having  therefore  assembled,  and  having 
deliberated  on  what  course  to  follow,  complied  with  all  that  Ala- 
ric required  of  them.  For  it  would  have  been  impossible  to 
avoid  death,  since  no  provisions  could  be  brought  from  the  port 
to  the  relief  of  the  city.  Accordingly  they  received  the  embassy 
of  Alaric,  invited  him  to  their  city,  and,  as  he  commanded, 
placed  Attalus,  the  prefect  of  the  city,  on  an  imperial  throne, 
with  a  purple  robe  and  a  crown  ;  who  presently  declared  Lain* 
padius  prefect  of  the  court,  and  Marcianus  of  the  city,  and  gave 
the  command  to  Alaric  and  Valens,  who  formerly  commanded 
the  Dalmatian  legions,  distributing  the  other  offices  in  proper  or- 
der. He  then  proceeded  towards  the  palace,  attended  by  an  im* 
perial  guard;  although  many  ill  omens  occurred  in  his  way.  The 
following  day,  entering  the  senate,  he  made  a  speech  full  of  ar- 
rogance, in  which  he  told  them  with  great  ostentation  that  he 
would  subdue  the  whole  world  to  the  Romans,  and  even  perform 
greater  things  than  that.  For  this  the  gods  perhaps  were  angry 
and  designed  soon  afterwards  to  remove  him. 

The  Romans  were  therefore  filled  with  joy,  having  not  only 
acquired  other  magistrates,  well  acquainted  with  the  manage* 
ment  of  affairs,  but  likewise  Tertullus,  with  whose  promotion  to 
the  consulship  they  were  exceedingly  gratified.  None  were  dis- 
pleased with  these  occurrences,  which  were  thought  conducive 
to  public  advantage,  except  only  the  family  of  the  Anicii;  be? 
cause  they  alone  having. got  into  their  hands  almost  all  the  mo* 
ney  in  the  city,  were  grieved  at  the  prosperous  state  of  affairs, 
prudently  advised  Attalus  to  send  a  competent  force  into 


176  THE  HISTORY  BOOK  ri. 

Africa  and  to  Carthage,  in  order  to  depose  Heraclianus  from  his 
dignity,  lest  he,  who  was  attached  to  Honoring,  should  obstruct 
'  their  designs.  But  AUalus  would  not  listen  to  his  admonitions, 
being  filled  with  expectations  given  him  by  the  soothsayers,  that 
he  should  subdue  Carthage  and  all  Africa  without  fighting,  and 
would  not  send  out  Drumas,  who,  with  the  barbarians  under  his 
command,  might  easily  have  turned  Heraclianus  out  of  his  office. 
Disregarding  the  counsels  of  Alaric,  he  gave  the  command  of  all 
the  troops  in  Africa  to  Constantine,  yet  sent  along  with  him  no 
good  soldiers.  In  the  mean  time,  while  the  affairs  of  Africa  con- 
tinued uncertain,  he  undertook  an  expedition  against  the  empe» 
ror,  who  was  at  Ravenna.  Upon  this,  the  emperor  was  so  ter- 
lifted  and  perplexed,  that  he  sent  out  ambassadors  to  propose  that 
the  empire  should  be  divided  between  them.  Jovius,  whom 
Attalus  had  made  prefect  of  the  court,  replied  that  Attains  would 
not  leave  Honorius  so  much  as  the  bare  title  of  emperor,  nor  even 
an  entire  body  ;  for  that  he  intended  to  send  him  to  reside  in  an 
island,  and  to  maim  him  in  some  of  his.  limbs.  These  arrogant 
expressions  excited  a  general  alarm,  and  Honorius  was  prepared 
to  fly.  When  he  had  for  that  purpose  collected  a  considerable 
number  of  ships  into  the  port  at  Ravenna,  six  regiments  of  auxi- 
liary soldiers  arrived  the/e,  which  were  expected  when  Stilico 
was  living,  but  did  not  come  from  the  east  until  that  period ; 
amounting  in  number  to  six  thousand.  At  their  arrival,  Honorius, 
as  if  awaked  from  a  deep  sleep,  confided  the  defence  of  the  walls 
to  those  who  were  come  from  the  east,  arid  resolved  to  remain  at 
Ravenna,  until  he  should  receive  better  intelligence  of  the  affairs 
of  Africa.  He  intended,  indeed,  if  Heraclianus  obtained  the 
ascendancy,  when  all  was  settled  and  secure  in  that  quarter,  to 
make  war  with  all  his  forces  against  Alaric  and  Attalus.  On 
the  contrary,  if  his  adherents  in  Africa  should  be  defeated,  he 
meant  to  sail  into  the  east  to  Theodosius,  with  the  ships  which  he 
had  in  readiness,  and  to  relinquish  the  empire  of  the  west. 

'While  such  were  the  intentions  of  Honorius,  Jovius,  who  as  I 
before  mentioned  was  sent  ambassador  to  Honorius,  began  to  en* 
tertain  treasonable  designs,  being  corrupted  by  Honorius  through 
means  of  other  persons.  He  therefore  declared  to  the  senate, 
that  he  would  no  longer  act  as  an  ambassador,  and  used  reproach- 
ful expressions  before  them,  telling  them  that  since  those  whom 
they  had  sent  into  Africa  had  failed  of  success,  they  ought  to  send 
over  Barbarians  against  Heraclianus.  For  Constantine  being  slain, 
their  hopes  from  that  part  of  the  world  were  become  very  preca- 
rious. Aftalus  being  enraged,  and  having  employed  other  per* 


vi,  OF  ZOS1MUS. 


sons  to  superintend  the  execution  of  his  orders,  others  were  sent 
into  Africa  with  money,  to  assist  in  the  present  exigencies  there. 
When  Alaric  understood  this,  he  was  displeased  at  it,  and  began 
to  despair  of  the  affairs  of  Attains,  who  formed  his  projects  with 
the  most  foolish  temerity,  without  either  reason  or  prospect  of  ad- 
vantage. Having  therefore  made  these  considerations,  he  resolved 
to  relinquish  the  siege  of  Ravenna,  although  he  had  before  deter- 
mined to  prosecute  it  until  he  took  the  place.  To  this  he  had  been 
persuaded  by  Jovius,  who,  when  he  heard  that  the  commander 
sent  in  to  Africa  by  Attains  had  totally  failed  in  his  purpose,  ap- 
plied himself  wholly  to  the  affairs  of  Honorius,  and  was  continually 
speaking  to  Alaric  to  the  prejudice  of  Attalus,  with  the  design  of 
inducing  him  to  believe,  that  as  soon  as  Attalus  should  have  se- 
cured the  empire  into  his  own  hands,  he  would  concert  the  death 
of  Alaric,  and  all  his  relations.  While  Alaric  continued  faithful 
to  the  oath  which  he  had  given  to  Attalus,  Valens,  the  com-* 
mander  of  the  cavalry,  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of  treason. 
Alaric  in  the  mean  time  proceeded  with  his  army  to  all  the  cities 
of  Emilia,  which  had  refused  to  accept  Attalus  as  their  sove- 
reign. Some  of  these  he  speedily  reduced  ;  but  having  besieged 
Bononia,  which  resisted  him  many  days,  without  being  able  to 
take  it,  he  advanced  towards  Liguria,  to  compel  that  country 
likewise  to  acknowledge  Attalus  as  its  emperor. 

Honorius,  having  sent  letters  to  the  cities  of  Britain,  counsel- 
ling them  to  be  watchful  of  their  own  security,  and  having  re- 
warded his  soldiers  with  the  money  sent  by  Heraclianus,  lived 
with.  all  imaginable  ease,  since  he  had  acquired  the  attachment 
of  the  soldiers  in  all  places.  Heraclianus  having  guarded  all  the 
ports  of  Africa  in  the  strictest  manner,  that  neither  corn  nor  oil, 
nor  any  other  provision,  should  be  conveyed  to  the  port  of  Rome, 
the  city  sustained  a  famine  more  grievious  than  the  former.  The 
venders  of  provisions  likewise  concealed  all  their  goods,  in  hope 
of  gaining  considerable  profit,  by  fixing  on  their  commodities 
what  price  they  pleased.  By  these  means  the  city  was  reduced 
to  such  extremities,  that  some  persons,  as  if  they  wished  that  hu- 
man flesh  might  be  eaten,  cried  out  in  the  Hippodrome,  "  Fix  a 
certain  price  on  human  flesh." 

On  this  occasion  Attalus  went  to  Rome,  and  .convened  the  se- 
nate. After  some  debate  most  of  them  were  of  opinion  that  the 
Barbarians  and  the  Roman  soldiers  ought  to  be  sent  into  Africa, 
and  that  Drumas  should  be  their  commander,  he  being  a  person 
who  had  already  given  proofs  of  his  fidelity  and  good  will.  Only 
Attalus  and  a  few  more  dissented  from  the  majority  of  the  senate, 
I.  NO*  3*  z 


178  THE  HISTORY  :  BOOK  rr. 

he  being  unwilling  to  send  out  a  Barbarian  as  commander  of  a 
Roman  army.  This  was  the  first  time  that  Alaric  formed  a  de- 
sign against  Attalus  to  depose  him  or  deprive  him  of  life  ;  al- 
though Jovius  had  previously  instigated  him  to  it  by  incessant 
calumnies,  and  false  accusations.  In  order  therefore  to  put  his 
design  in  execution,  he  led  Attalus  out  before  the  city  of  Arimi- 
num,  where  he  then  resided,  and  stripping  him  of  his  diadem  and 
purple  robe,  sent  them  to  the  emperor  Honorius.  But  although 
he  reduced  Attalus  to  the  condition  of  a  private  individual  be- 
fore all  the  people,  he  kept  him  and  his  son  Ampeliusat  his  own 
house,  until  he  had  made  peace  with  Honorius,  when  he  procured 
their  pardon.  Placida,  the  emperor's  sister,  was  also  with  Alaric, 
in  the  quality  of  an  hostage,  but  received  all  the  honour  and  at- 
tendance due  to  a  princess. 

Such  was  the  state  of  Italy,  while  Constantine  gave  a  diadem 
to  his  son  Constans,  and  from  a  Caesar  raised  him  to  an  emperor; 
after  having  deprived  Apollinarius  of  his  office,  and  appointed 
another  person  prefect  of  the  court  in  his  room.  In  the  mean- 
time Alaric  proceeded  to  Ravenna  to  confirm  the  peace  with 
Honorius  ;  but  fortune  invented  another  obstacle  beyond  all  ex- 
pectation, and  as  it  were  pointed  out  what  should  befal  the  com- 
monwealth. For  while  Sarus  was  stationed  with  a  few  Barbarians 
in  Picenum,  and  joined  neither  with  the  emperor  nor  with  Ala- 
ric, Ataulphus,  who  had  an  animosity  against  him  on  the  ground 
of  some  former  difference,  came  with  his  whole  army  to  the  place 
where  Sarus  happened  to  be.  As  soon  as  Sarus  perceived  him 
approaching,  finding  himself  not  able  to  centend  with  him,  as  he 
had  only  three  hundred  men,  he  resolved  to  fly  to  Honorius,  and 
assist  him  in  the  war  against  Alaric.  ******* 

SUPPLEMENT. 

THE  remainder  of  this  Book  is  lost.  Phot.ius  in  his  Biblio- 
theca  mentions,  that  the  history  of  Zosimus  ended  with  the  tak- 
ing of  Rome  by  Alaric.  Since  Zosimus  is  unfortunately  deficient 
in  this  point,  and  a  particular  narrative  of  the  sacking  of  Rome 
is  not  met  with  in  any  other  author,  the  following  account  is  ex- 
tracted from  Baptista  Egnatius. 

Alaric  had  bee/eged  Rome  for  two  years  successively,  and  Ho- 
norius, who  then  lay  idly  at  Ravenna,  had  neither  resolution  nor 
power  to  relieve  it.  For  being  in  nothing  more  unconcerned  than 
in  the  safety  of  the  city  after  the  death  of  Stilico,  he  had  appointed 
no  person  to  command  the  army,  and  manage  the  war  against  the 
Goths.  This  determined  the  Goths  on  besieging  the  city,  perceiv- 


BOOK  vi.  OF  ZOSIMUS.  179 

ing  that  the  Roman  soldiers  were  either  fled  or  very  negligent 
of  their  duty,  the  BarbarMms  having  long  endeavoured  in  vain, 
and  being  unable  to  take  it  by  assault,  were  obliged  to  have 
recourse  to  stratagem.  They  pretended  to  return  into  their 
own  country,  and  selected  three  hundred  young  men  of  great 
strength  and  courage,  whom  they  bestowed  on  the  Roman 
nobility  as  a  present,  having  previously  instructed  them  to 
oblige  their  masters  by  all  possible  observance,  and  on  a  cer- 
'tain  day  appointed,  about  noon,  when  the  nobility  were  either 
asleep  or  otherwise  unmindful  of  business,  to  meet  suddenly 
at  the  gate  called  Porta  Avinaria,  where  having  surprised 
and  killed  the  guards,  they  should  open  the  gate  for  those  who 
would  be  there  in  waiting.  Meanwhile  the  Goths  delayed  their 
return  home,  under  pretence  of  still  wanting  something,  until 
the  three  hundred  youths,  making  a  good  use  of  their  opportu- 
nity, opened  the  gate  to  their  countrymen.  The  Goths,  on  being 
admitted,  immediately  began  to  plunder  the  city,  although  they 
committed  more  dishonour  than  mischief  to  the  citizens.  It  is 
the  opinion  of  some,  that  the  gate  was  opened  by  the  contrivance 
of  Proba,  a  lady  of  great  rank  and  wealth,  who  compassionated 
the  people  of  Rome,  who  were  dying  of  famine  and  of  several 
distempers,  like  sheep.  There  are  two  circumstances  relative  to 
this  occasion  worthy  of  being  noticed.  The  one  is,  that  an  edict 
was  made  by  Alaric,  that  whoever  took  refuge  in  the  churches  of 
saints,  especially  in  those  of  Peter  and  Paul,  should  receive  no  in- 
jury; which  was  accordingly  observed  with  great  care.  The 
other  was,  that  when  Honorius  received  intelligence  at  Ravenna 
that  Rome  (Roma)  was  destroyed,  he  understood  by  it  a  certain 
strong  Gaul,  whose  name  was  Roma,  and  thought  it  very  remark- 
able that  he  should  so  soon  be  cut  off,  with  whom  a  little  before 
he  had  so  diverted  himself. 


THE    END    OF    THE    HISTORY    OF    ZOSIMUS. 


COMPARATIVE  VIEW 


OF 


ANTIENT  AND  OF  MODERN 


GEOGRAPHY. 


Jn  the  following  Tables,  the  Countries  unknown  to  the  Ancients,  or  61? 
which  the  Names  are  uncertain,  are  left  blank. 


182 


MODERN  EUROPE. 


MODERN  EUROPE. 

GREENLAND,  or  the  Arctic  Continent 

SPITSBERGEN  Island 

ICELAND  Island,  belonging  to  Norway 

1.  Wardhuis,  or  Norwegian  Lapland 

1 2.  Drontheim 

3.  Bergen 

4.  Aggerhuis,  or  Christiana 

1.  Lapland  and  West  Bothinia 
,2.  Sweden  Proper 
SWEDEN  <3.  Gothland 
'4.  Finland 

5.  Islands  of  Gothland,  Oeland,  Aland,  Rugen 


NORWAY. 


RUSSIA  in 
EUROPE 


Jutland 


1.  Alburg 
1 2.  Wyburg 
3.  Aarhusen 
'4.  Rypen 
5.  Sleswick 


DEN M ARK < 


Danish 
Islands  in< 
the  Baltic 

'1.  Zealand 
2.  Funen 
3.  Falster 
4.  Longeland 
5.  Laland 
6.  Femeren 
7.  Alsen 
8.  Moen 
^9.  Bornholm 

1.  Livonia  and  Estonia 

2.  Ingria,  or  the  Government  of  Petersburg 

3.  Carelia,  or  the  Government  of  Wiburg 

4.  Novogrod 

5.  Archangel,  Samoieda 

6.  Moscow 

7.  Nishnei  Novogrod 

8.  Smolensk! 

9.  Kiew 

10.  Bielgorod 

11.  Woronesk 

12.  Azoff 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


2.  Nerigon 
.  3.  Sitones 
SCANDINAVIA, 
SCANDIA,  VEL<(  1.  Scritofinni 
BALTIA. 


2.  Suiones 

3.  Gutae  et  Hilleviones 

4.  Finningia 

^5.  Insulae  Sinus  Codani 


Chersonesus 
Cimbrica 


Insulae 

Sinus 

Codani 

SARMATIA 
EUROPJSA. 


1.  Cimbri 

3.  Harudes 

'4.  Phundusii,  Sigulones 
5.  Saablingii 


Teutones 


r  1.  Hirri  et  JSsthi  vel  Ostiones 

4.  Budini 
6.  Basilic! 
8.  Cariones 

10.  &  4.  Budini 

11.  Roxolani 

12.  lazyges 


MODERN  EUROPE. 


FRANCE.   4 


UNITED  NE- 
THERLANDS. 


AUSTRIAN, 
FRENCH, 
and  DUTCH 
NETHER- 
LANDS. 


1.  Picardy 

2.  Isle  of  France 

3.  Champagne 

4.  Normandy 

5.  Bretany 

6.  Orleannois 

7.  Lionnois 

8.  Provence 

9.  Languedoc 

10.  Guienne 

11.  Gascoigne 

12.  Dauphin6 

13.  Burgundy  and  Franchecomte 

14.  Lorraine  and  Alsace 

1.  Holland 

2.  Friesland 

3.  Zealand 

4.  Groningen 

5.  Overyssell 

6.  Guelderland  and  Zupten 

7.  Utrecht 


2.  Antwerp,  Austrian 

3.  Mechlin  or  Malines,  Austrian, 

4-Limburg,    j 

•.Lu~nbu.gb.J2Ek 

6.  Namur,  Austrian 

7.  Hainault,     \£**& 

}  French 

8.  Cambresis,  French 

9.  Artois,  French 

p  Dutch 

10.  Flanders,  >  Austrian 
}  French 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


145 


1.  Ambiani 

2.  Bellovaci,  Parisii,  Suessones 

3.  Remi,  Catalauni,  Tricasses,  13.  Lingones 

4.  Unelli  vel  Veneti,  Saii,  Lexovii, 

Veliocasses 

5.  Osisraii,  Veneti,  Namnetes,  An-l 

des,  Redones  >  Celtae 

6.  Aureliani,    Carnutes,    Senones,f 

Turones,  Pictones,  Bituriges, 


GALLIA. 


7.  Mdui,  Segusiani 

8.  Salyes,  Cavares 

9.  Volcae,  Arecomici,  Helvii,  Tolosates 

10.  Petrocorii,  Bituriges,  Cadurci,  Ruteni 

11.  Aquitani 

12.  Allobroges,  Centrdnes 

13.  Lingones,  ^Edui,  Sequani 

14.  Leuci,  Mediomatrici,  Tribdci,  Nemetes 


SAX  ONES. 


[UFrisii 

i4- 

5. 

16. 


4.  Cauci  vel  Chauci 

Franci 

Bructeri,  Catti,  Sicambri 
f.  Batavi 


1.  Menapii,  Tungrii 

2.  Toxandri 
4. 


>  Alemanni 


5. 


Treyeri 
7.  Remi 


9.  Atrebates,  Verdtnandui 

10.  Belgae,  Morini 


VOL,  1.  NO.  3. 


186 


MODERN  EUROPE. 


I.  Upper  Saxony 
5.  Lower  Saxony 

3.  Westphalia 

GERMANY.^  4.  Upper  Rhine 

5.  Lower  Rhine 

6.  Franconia 

7.  Austria 

8.  Bavaria 
Q.  Suabia 

Cl.  Bohemia  Proper 
BOHEMIA.  <2.  Silesia 
£3.  Moravia 

1.  Greater  Poland 

2.  Lesser  Poland 

3.  Prussia  Royal 

4.  Prussia  Ducal 

5.  Samogitia 

6.  Courland 
POLAND.    <    7.  Lithuania 

8.  Warsovia 

9.  Polachia 
10.  Polesia 

II.  Red  Russia 

12.  Podolia 

13.  Volhinia 

1.  rGallicia. 

2.  ?Asturia 

3.  I  Biscay 

4.  C  Navarre 

5.  ?Arragon 

6.  c  Catalonia 

SPAIN,        X    7.  f  Valentia 
'8.   iMurcia 
9.  y  Granada 

10.  (Andalusia 

11.  r  Old  Castile 

12.  \  New  Castile 

13.  jLeon 

,14.  (Estremadura 

C  Ivica 

SPANISH  ISLANDS. < Majorca 
f  Minorca 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


187 


NATIONES 
GERMANICS 


GERMANO- 
SAKMAT& 


HlSPANIA 

vel  IBERIA. 


'1.  Suevi,  Lingae,  &c. 

2.  Saxones,  Longobardi, 

Gambrivii 

3.  Cherusci,  Chamavi  Gau-V  Saxones 

chf,  Germania  Inferior  I 

4.  Germania  Superior 

5.  Marci,  Tincteri 

6.  Marcomanni,  Hermonduri 

7.  Noricum 

8.  Rhaetia 

9.  Vindelicia 


1.  Boiohoemum 

2.  Corconti 

3.  Quadi 

1.  Peucini 

2.  Lugii 

3.  £  Burgundiones,  Rugii,  Gu- 

4.  (.     thones 

5.  Ombroges 

6.  Scyri 


1* 


Germano-Sarmatia 


11.  ^ 

12.  >Bastarn3e 

13.  3 

1.  ^ 

2.  >  Galla3cia,-Cantabri,  Aistures,  Varduli 

3.  ^ 


5.  >  Tarraconensis-Vascones,  Valetani 

6.  $ 

7.  }  Carthaginensis — ./Editani,  Contes- 

8.  r         tani 

9.  (  Bastica — Bastiani,  Bastuli,  Turde- 
10.  )         tani,  &c. 

11.  Gallaeciae  pars — Accoei,  Arevaci 

12.  Tarraconensis  pars-Carpetani,  Oretani 

13.  Galla3ci33  pars — Vettones 

14.  Lusitariiic  pars— Basturia 


INSULJE  HISPANIC.  >  Baleares 


168 


MODERN  EUROPE. 


Entre  Minho  e  Douro 
Tralps  Montes 
iBeira 

PORTUGAL.  ^Estremadura 
|  Entre  Tajo 
Alentajo 
Algarva 

1.  Bern 

2.  Friburg 

3.  Basil  or  Bale 

4.  Lucern 

5.  Soluturn 

6.  Schaffhausen 

7.  Zurick 
SWITZERLAND.^    8.  Appenzel 

9.  Zug 

10.  Schweitz 

11.  Claris 

12.  Uri 

13.  Underwald 

14.  Geneva 
^15.  Grisons,  &c. 


Confederates  of  the 
Swiss 


ITALY.< 


ITALIAN 
ISLANDS. 


1.  Savoy 

2.  Piedmont 

3.  Montferrat 

4.  Milan 

5.  Genoa 

6.  Parma 

7.  Modena 

8.  Mantua 

9.  Venice 

10.  Trent 

11.  The  Popedom 

12.  Tuscany 

13.  Lucca 

14.  San  Marino 

.  Kingdom  of  Naples 

1.  Sicily 

2.  Sardinia 

3.  Corsica 
,4.  Malta 

5.  Lipari  Islands 

6.  Capri,  Ischia,  &c. 


HUNGARY. 
TRANSYLVANIA. 

SCLAVONIA. 
GROATIA. 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


189 


Calliaci 

LUSITANIA./  Lusitani 
Celtic! 


HELVETIA.  << 


ITALIA.  < 


INSULJS 
ITALICS 


DACIA. 


14.  Nantuates 

15.  Veragri,  Vallis  Pennina,  Lepontii 

1.  Leponti,  Segusini,  Taurini 

2.  Orobi        -\ 

tlnsubres    (  Liguria 

5.  )  I  Gallia  Cis- 

6.  Anamani  f  alpina  vel 

7.  Boii  Togata 

8.  Cenomani 

9.  Venetia 

10.  Tridentini 

11.  Lingones,  Senones,  Picenum,  Umbria, 

Sabini,  Pars  Latii 

12.  Tusoia  vel  Etruria 

13.  Pars  Tusciae 

14.  Pars  Umbrias 

15.  Samnium,  Pars  Latii,  Apulia,  Campania, 

Lncania,  Bruttium 

1.  Sicilia,  Sicania,  vel  Trinacria 
.  Sardo,  vel  Sardinia 
'3.  Cyrnus  vel  Corsica 
1 4.  Melita 

5.  Lipariae  Insulae 

6.  Capreae,  Ischia,  &c. 


PANNONIA. 

JLLYRICUM. 


MODERN  EUROPE. 


TURKEY  in 
EUROPE. 


GREEK 
ISLANDS. 


1.  Dalmatia 

2.  Bosnia 

3.  Servia 

4.  Wallachia 

5.  Moldavia  and  Bessarabia 

6.  Bulgaria 

7.  Albania 

8.  Macedonia 

9.  Romania 

10.  Livadia 

11.  Morea 

12.  Budziac  Tartary  or  Bessarabia 

13.  Little  Tartary 

14.  Crimea 

1.  Corfu 

1 2.  Cephalonia 

1 3.  Zante 

.4.  Ithace,  Thiace,  &c. 


1.  Candia 
In    the  AR-  )  2.  Negropont 
CHIPELAGO.  J3.  Stalimene 

4.  Scyro,  &c. 


ANCIENT  EUROPE. 


GR^JCIA. 


1.  Dalmatia 

2.  Moesia  Superior 

3.  Dacia  Ripensis 

4.  Getae 

5.  Pars  Daciae 

6.  Moesia  Inferior 

7.  Epirus 

8.  Macedonia 

9.  Thracia 

10.  Thessalia 

11.  Peloponnesus 

.  Scythia  et  pars  Daciae 

13.  Parva  Scythia 

14.  Taurica  Chersonesus 


l.  Corcyra 
INSULT  ^2.  Cephalenia 

MARIS  IONII.  j3.  Zacynthus 

4.  Ithaca,  &c. 


INSULT  MA- 
filS 


1.  Creta 

2.  Euboea 

3.  Lemnos 

4.  Scyros,  &c. 


.Oil 

i  \r 


19* 


EUROPE. 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 

MODERN. 

ANCIENT. 

1.  Edinburgh 
3.  Haddington 

2.'  I  Damnii    ?Vecturiones 

3.  Berwick 

3.  Ottodini      > 

4.  Roxburgh 

4.  •) 

5.  Selkirk 
6.  Dumfries 

5.  f 
Q   /  Selgovae 

7.  Kircudbright 

7.   ) 

8.  Peebles 

8.  -\ 

9.  Wigton 
10.  Lanerk 

9.  /   T 

10.  r  Novantes 

11.  Air 

11.  )                1 

12.  Dumbarton 

12.  \ 

13.  Bute 

13.  / 

14.  Renfrew 

14.  >  Damnii 

, 

15.  Stirling 

15.  t                  1  p. 

p 

16.  Linlithgow 

^ 

16.  3                  /Picti 

< 

17.  Fife 

H  j 

17.  S 

h4  < 
t* 

O 

18.  Clackmannan 
19.  Kinross 

0 

ia  \Caledonii 

CO 

20.  Perth 

20.   3 

21.  Argyle 

21.  Epidii,  Gadeni,  Ce- 

rones 

22.  Kincardine 

22.  Vernicones,  \ 

23.  Forfar 

23.  Horestae,      / 

24.  Aberdeen 

24.  ^                  >Attacoti 

25.  Banff 

25.  5-Taezali      i 

26.  Elgin 

26.  >                   } 

27.  Nairn 

27.  > 

28.  Inverness 

28.  \     acomagi 

29.  Ross 

29.'  ^              } 

30.  Cromarty 
31.  Sutherland 

30.  SCantae  f  0 
31.  >              (  Scot 

32.  Caithness 

32.  Mertae      ; 

33.  Orkney 

33.  Orcades 

> 

J34.  Shetland 

,34.  Thule 

(  1.  Cornwall 
V  2.  Devonshire 

lt  ?  Damnonii 

1  3.  Dorsetshire 
j  4.  Hampshire 

3.  Durotriges- 
4.  -; 

/  5.  Somersetshire 

5.  SBelgae 

p 

V  6.  Wiltshire 

6.  5 

5. 

!7.  Berkshire 

< 

7.  Attrebatii 

CJ 

hr 

8.  Oxfordshire 

8.  i 

H 

9.  Gloucestershire 

9,  ?  Dobuni 

1 

10.  Monmouthshire 

10.  >0 

11.  Herefordshire 

H    >  Silures 

12.  Worcestershire 

12!  1 

13.  Staffordshire 

13.  >Cornavii 

14.  Shropshire 

.14.  S 

EUROPE. 


193 


GREAT  BRITAIN. 

MODERN. 

ANCIENT. 

/-1  5.  Essex 

15.  Trinobantes 

\16.  Hartfordshire 

16.  Catieuchlani 

<17.  Kent 

17.  Cantii 

Vl8.  Surry 

18.   ) 

\.  19.  Sussex 

in    t  -ixegni 
iy.  j 

/•  20.  Norfolk 

20.  >  Simeni  vel 

W21.  Suffolk 

21.  S      Iceni 

122.  Cambridgeshire 

22.  > 

*Mt 

\-23.  Huntingdonshire 

23.  >  Catieuchlani 

1 

/24.  Bedfordshire 

24.  3 

.a 

v25.  Buckinghamshire 

25.  Attrebatii 

0 

0 

/•  26.  Lincolnshire 

26.  ^ 

x 

v  27.  Nottinghamshire 

27.  / 

fe 

^28.  Derbyshire 

28.  \  Coritani 

»-3 

/29.  Rutlandshire 

29.  \ 

o 

fc 

J30.  Leicestershire 

30.  J 

W 

/31.  Warwickshire 

31.  Cornavi 

V32.  Northamptonshire 

32.  Catieuchlani 

!33.  Northumberland 

33.  > 

34.  Durham 

Q/I    c  Ottadeni 

o4.    ^ 

35.  Yorkshire 

35.  \ 

36.  Lancashire 
37.  Westmoreland 

3^-  \  Brigantes 

38.  Cumberland 

38.   J 

39.  Cheshire 

39.  Cornavii 

L    40.  Middlesex 

^40.  Attrebates  et  Catieuchlani 

"  1.  Anglesey 

1.  Mona  Insula 

2.  Flintshire 

2.  ^ 

3.  Montgomery 
4.  Denbighshire 

3.  / 

4.  >Ordovices 

CO 

5.  Carnarvonshire 

5.  i 

M 

6.  Merioneth 

6.  } 

?• 

7.  Cardiganshire 
8.  Carmarthenshire 

7.  1 
8.  >DemetaD 

9.  Pembrokeshire 

9.  S 

10.  Radnorshire 

10.  1 

11.  Brecknockshire 

11.  /Silures 

k!2.  Glamorganshire 

,12.  ) 

VOL>    1.   NO.   3. 


194 


EUROPE. 


f 

MODEKN. 

ANCIENT. 

1.  Louth 

1.  Voluntii 

2.  Meath  East 
3.  Meath  West 

a  J  Cauci 

4.  Longford 

4.  Auteri 

|* 

5.  Dublin 

5.  > 

ff  ^ 

6.  Kildare 

6.  jBtepH 

'£ 
H-J 

7.  King's  County 
8.  Queen's  County 

Q    t  Coriondi 

O.      ) 

9.  Wicklow 

9.  Blanii 

10.  Carlo  w 
11.  Wexford 

10.  >__ 
jj    ?  Manapi 

.12.  Kilkenny 

12.  Coriondi 

r!3.  Donnegal  or  Tyr-  > 

w 
fc 

13.  Vennicnii 

connel         5 

w 

Q 

14.  Londonderry 

hH 

14.  1 

§ 

15.  Antrim 

--H 

15.  >  Robogdii 

*J  ^ 
W 

£  J  16.  Tyrone 

^     " 

16.  S 

- 

H^ 

17.  Fermanagh 

M 

17.  Erdini 

^ 

P 

18.  Armagh 

rt 

18.  1 

19.  Down 

CQ 

19.  >  Voluntii 

20.  Monaghan 

20.  > 

21.  Cavan 

W 

21.  Cauci 

/-  22.  Cork  County 

22.  Vodiae,  Iverni 

S3  V23.  Waterford 
|  124.  Tipperary 

23    i 
34"  <  Brigantes 

=s  }25.  Limerick 
S  /26.  Kerry 

20    ^Velabori 

V  27.  Clare 

37!  7 

>Gangani 

£  r  28.  Oalway 

28.  3 

|D\29.  Roscommon 

29.  Auteri 

g  <30.  Mayo 

30.  1 

§  J31.  Sligoe 
U  C  32.  Leitrim 

31.  >  Nagnatae 
32.  > 

EUROPE. 


195 


BRITANNIC 
ISLANDS. 


MODERN. 

1.  Shetland  and  Orkney 

2.  Western  Isles  of  Scot- 

land 
1 3.  Man 

4.  Anglesey 

5.  Wight 


ANCIENT. 

1.  Thule 

2.  Ebudes  Insulae 

3.  Monaeda  vel  Mo- 

4.  Mona  [na 

5.  Vectis 


ASIA 


< 

M 
< 

c 


MODERN. 

1.  Natolia 


£.  Amasia  or  Siwas 

3.  Aladulia 

4.  Caramania 


5.  Irak 

6.  Diarbek 

7.  Curdistan 

8.  Turcoman ia 

9.  Georgia 

10.  Syria  and  Palestine 


ARABIA. 


Arabia  Petraea 
Arabia  Deserta 
Arabia  Felix 


ANCIENT. 

1.  Mysia,  Lydia,   Caria, 
Phrygia,  Bithynia,  Ga- 
latia,  Paphlagonia 

2.  Pontus 

1 3.  Armenia 

4.  Cappadocia   Cilicia, 


5.  Babylonia,  ChaWea 

6.  Mesopotamia 

7.  Assyria 

o       "\ 

'  J  JVrmenia  Major 

V/«  J 

C  Syria,  Palmyrene 
/  Phoenicia,  Judea 


10. 


ARABIA. 


Arabia  Petraa 
Arabia  Deserta 
Arabia  Felix 


196 


MODERN  ASIA. 


PERSIA.  4 


1.  Chorassan 

2.  Balk,  Sablustan,  and  Candahar 

3.  Sigistan 

4.  Makeran 

5.  Kerman 

6.  Farsistan 

7.  Chusestan 

8.  Irak  Agem 

9.  Curdestan 

10.  Aderbeitzen 

11.  Georgia 

12.  Gangea 

13.  Dagestan 

14.  Mazanderam 

15.  Gilan  Taberistan 

16.  Chirvan 


Mogol 


Belli 
Agra 
Cambaia 
Bengal 


INDIA.  <     Ganges 


T    •          i  Decan 

JL •     A    )Golconda 
within   the<!Bisnagar 

Malabar 


Island  of  Ceylon 
Pegu 


India 

beyond  the 

Ganges 


(Tonquin 
iCochinchina 
Siam 


ANCIENT  ASIA. 


1.  Pars  Hyrcaniae  et  Sogdiana? 

2.  Bactriana 

3.  Drangiana 
4. 

5.  Gedrosia 

6.  Persis 

7.  Susiana 

,.  8.  Parthia 

PERSIA.  <    p  p&rs 

10.  Media 

11.  3 

12.  >  Iberia,  Colchis,  et  Albania 

13.  3 


INDIA. 


15.  Pars  Hyrcaniae 

16.  Pars  Albania? 


India 
intra       ^ 
Gangem 


Pali  both  ra 

Agora 

Regna  Pori  et  Taxilia 


Dachanos 

Prasii  vel  Gangaridas 

.Male 


Taprobana  Ins.  vel  Salice 


India 

extra 

Gangem 


Sinarum  Regio 


3 


ASIA. 


CHINA. 


MODERN. 

Niuche 

Corea 

Laotong 

Pekin 

Xansi 

Xensi 

Xantum 

Nanking 

Chekiam 

Honan 

Huquam 

Kiamsi 

Fokien 

Canton 

Quamsi 

Suchuen 

Quecheu 

Yunum 


Formosa 
CHINESE  ^Ainan 
ISLANDS.  ) Macao 

Bashee  Islands 


1.  Astracan 

2.  Orenburg 
3.  Casan 
r  Tobolsk 

<  o-u    •       IJeniseia 
4.  Siberia.   jlrkutgk 

f  Kamschatka 

SCYTHIA  * 
intra     : 
IMACTM,  - 

1.  SARMATIA 
Asiatica 

» 

y  *  1 

Indepen-  1 1 .  Great  Bucharia 

dent  Tar-  > 

tary.          )  2.  Karasm 


ALUTH- 
TARTARS. 


CHINESE 
TARTARY. 


1.  Little  Bucharia 

\.  Caspar 
'3.  Turkestan 

L  Kalmuc  Tartars 
'5.  Thibet 
6.  Little  Thibet 

Kalkas 

Mongol  Tartars 
Mantchou  Tartars 
Corea 


ANCIENT. 


Sinae 

Serica 

Cathael 


1.  Bactriana 
Sogdiana 

2.  Aria 


SCYTHIA 

extra 
IMAUM. 


MODERN   ASIA. 


ISLANDS  of  CHI-  C  Sagalien-Ula-hata 
NESE  TARTARY.  ^  Jedso 

f  Japan  or  Niphon 
ISLANDS  of  JAPAN.   /  Xicoco 
C  Ximo 

PHILIPPINE    C  Lucon  or  Manilla 
ISLES.  (  Mindanao,  &c. 

MARIAN  or  LADRONE  ISLANDS.    Tinian 

C  Borneo 

ISLES  of  SUNDA.  <  Sumatra 
C  Java,  &c. 

f  Celebes 
j  Amboyna 

MOLUCCA  ISLES.  ^  Ceram 
j  Timor 
[Fiores,  &c. 

MALDIVA  ISLES. 


800 


MODERN  AFRICA. 


MODERN  AFRICA: 

1.  Morocco 

2.  Algiers 
BARBARY.  ^  3.  Tunis 

4.  Tripoli 
^5.  Barca 

1.  EGYPT 

2.  BlLDULGERlD 

3.  ZAARA,  or  the  DESERT 

4.  NEGROLAND 

5.  GUINEA 

C  Nubia 

6.  UPPER  ETHIOPIA,  /  Abyssinia 

^Abex 

7.  LOWER  ETHIOPIA 

Loan go 
i  Congo 

8.  LOWER  GUINEA.  <  Angola 

Benguela 
^  Matanan 

9.  AJAN 

10.  ZANGUEBAR 

11.  MONOMOTAPA 

12.  MONOEMUGI 

13.  SOFOLA 

14.  TERRA  de  NATAL 

15.  CAFRARIA,  or  country  of  the  HOTTENTOTS 


ANCIENT  AFRICA.  201 


ANCIENT  AFRICA. 

1.  Mauretania  Tingitana 
1 2.  Mauretania  Caesariensis 
3.  Numidia,  Africa  Propria 
U.  Tripolitana 
5.  Cyrenaica,  Libya  Superior 


1.  jEGYPTUS 

2.  LIBYA  INFERIOR,  G^TULIA 

3.  SOLITUDINES 

4.  AUTOLOLES 


6.  ^ETHIOPI>G  et  LIBY^:  pars 

7.  Jj/rntopi.*;  pars 


VOL.  I.  No.  3. 


.202 


NORTH  AMERICA. 


NORTH  AMERICA. 


1. 


. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
.  7. 

8. 
v  9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 


1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13t 
14. 
lo. 


BRITISH. 

The  countries  on  the  east  and  west  sides  of  Baffin's 

and  Hudson's  Bays 
Labrador,  or  New  Britain 
Canada 
Nova  Scotia 
New  England 
New  York 
Vew  Jersey 
Pennsylvania 

Maryland  !>  United  States. 

Virginia  - 
North  Carolina 
Sonth  Carolina 
Georgia 
Florida 


ISLANDS, 


Newfoundland 

Cape  Breton 

Bermudas 

Long  Island 

Bahama  Islands 

Jamaica 

St  Christopher's 

Nevis 

Monserrat 

Antigua 

Dominica 

St  Vincent 

Tohago 

Grenada 

Barbadoes,  &c.  &c. 


SPANISH. 


"1.  Mexico  or  New  Spain 

2.  New  Mexico 

3.  Louisiana 


ISLANDS. 


i.  Cuba 
,2.  Porto  Rico 

'3.  West  part  of  St  Domingo 
1 4.  Trinidad 

5.  Margarita 

6.  Cubagua,  &c. 


NORTH  AMERICA. 


203 


DUTCH  ISLANDS. 


1.  Part  of  St  Martin's  Isle 

2.  Eustatius 
'3.  Aves 

1 4.  Buenayres 
5.  Curacoa 
6\  Aruba 


FRENCH  ISLANDS, 


1.  Miquelon 

2.  St  Pierre 

3.  Part  of  St  Martin's  Isle 

4.  St  Bartholomew 

5.  Martini co 

6.  Guadaloupe 

7.  Desiada 

8.  Mariegalante 

9.  St  Lucia 

10.  Part  of  St,  Domingo 


DANISH  ISLANDS 


1.  St  Thomas 

2.  Santa  Cruz 


SOUTH  AMERICA. 

+?n  5  Part  of  the  Province  of  Guiana.  Cayenne, 

'H'  t         &c.  &c. 

1.  Terra  Firma 

2.  Country  of  the  Amazons 
13.  Peru 

SPANISH.   <  4.  Chili 

1 5.  Terra  Magellanica 

6.  Paraguay 

7.  Tucuman 

DUTCH.        Part  of  Guiana,  Surinam,  &c* 

C  Brasil,  and  many  islands  on  the 
PORTUGUESE.  <         coast 

r  Part  of  Guiana 


204  ANCIENT  EMPIRES. 


The  Empire  of  Assyria,  under  Ninus  and  Semiramis,  about 
•2200  before  J.  C.  comprehended, 

Asia  Minor 
Colchis 
Assyria   v  »\ 
Media  Chaldea 

Egypt 


The  Empire  of  Assyria,  as  divided  about  820  before  J.  C, 
formed  three  kingdoms. 

Media 

Babylo-Chaldea  S  Syria 

I  Chaldea 

Lydia  All  Asia  Minor 


The  Empire  of  the  PERSIANS,  under  Darius  Hystaspes, 
522  before  J.  C.  comprehended,  -  ^ 

Persia 
Susiana 

Chaldea 

Assyria 

Media 

Bactriana 

Armenia 

Asia 

Parthia 

Iberia 

Albania 

Colchis 

Asia  Minor 

Egypt 

Part  of  Ethiopia 

PartofScythia 


ANCIENT  EMPIRES. 


20S 


The  Empire  of  ALEXANDER  THE  GREAT,  330  before  J.  C, 
consisted  of, 

1.  All  Macedonia  and  Greece,  excepting  Peloponnesus 

2.  All  the  Persian  Empire,  as  above  described 

3.  India  to  the  banks  of  the  Indus  on  the  east,  and  the  lax- 
artes  or  Tanais  on  the  north. 


The  Empire  of  ALEXANDER  was  thus  divided  306  before 
J.  C.  between  Ptolemy,  Cassander,  Lysimachus,  and  Se- 
leucus. 

Egypt 

Empire  of         b'a 


Empire  of 
Cassander. 


Palestine 

Macedonia 
Greece 


Empire  of     $  Thrace 
Lysimachus.  I  Bithynia 


Empire  of 
Seleucus 


Syria,  and 

All  the  rest  of  Alexander's  empire 


The  Empire  of  the  PARTHIANS,  140   before  J,  C,  compre- 
hended, 


Parthia 

Hyrcania 

Media 

Persis 

Bactriana 

Babylonia 

Mesopotamia 

India  to  the  Indus 

The  ROMAN  Empire,  under  the  Kings,  was  confined  to  the 
CKy  of  Rome,  and  a  few  miles  around  it 


206  ANCIENT  EMPIRES. 


The  ROMAN  Empire,  at  the  end  of  the  Republic,  compre- 
hended, 

All  Italy 

Great  part  of  Gaul 

Part  of  Britain 

Africa  Proper 

Great  part  of  Spain 

Illyria,  Istria,  Liburnia,  Dalmatia 

Achaia 

Macedonia 

Dardania,  Moesia,  Thracia 

Pontus,  Armenia 

Judaea,  Cilicia,  Syria 

Egypt 

tinder  the  Emperors, 

All  Spain  ^ 

The  Alps,  Maritimae,  Piedmont,  &c.  J 

Rhaetia,  Noricum,  Pannonia,  &  Moesia  f  were  reduced 

Pontus,  Armenia  Vinto  '  Roman 

^ssyria  (  provinces. 

Arabia  % 


Constantfus  Chlorus  and  Galerius  divided  the  Empire  into 
Eastern  and  Western  ;  and  under  Constantine  each  had  a 
distinct  capital  or  seat  of  Empire. 

The  extent  of  each  division  was  fluctuating  from  time  to 
time  -,  but  in  general, 

( Italy 

\  Illyria 

The  Western  Empire  1  Africa 
comprehended  \  Spain 

/The  Gauls 

v  Britain 

/  Asia 

L  Pontus,  Armenia 

The  Eastern  Empire  1  Assyria,  Media,  &c. 
comprehended  S  Egypt 

JThrace 

/  Dacia 

v  Macedonia 


ANCIENT  EMPIRES 


207 


The   Empire  of  Charlemagne,  A.  D.  800,  comprehended, 

Neustria,  comprehending   Bretany,  Norman- 
dy, Isle  of  France,  Orleannois 
(Austria,  comprehending  Picardy,  and  Cham- 
j     pagne 

France.   v\quitania,  comprehending  Guienne,  and  Gas- 
1     cony 

Burgundia,  comprehending  Burgundy,  Lion- 
nois,  Languedoc,  Dauphiny,  Provence 

Marca  Hispanica,  or  Navarre  and  Catalonia 
Majorca,  Minorca,  and  Ivica,  Corsica 
Italy,  as  far  south  as  Naples 
Istria,  Liburnia,  Dalmatia 
Rhaetia,  Vindelica,  Noricum 

Germany,  from    the  Rhine  to  the  Oder,  and  the  banks  of 
the  Baltic 


A  CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 

FOR  THE  BYZANTINE  HISTORIANS. 

EXPLANATION  OF  THE  TABLE  OF  CHRONOLOGY. 

THE  Plan  of  the  following  CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE,  though  ex- 
tremely simple,  requires,  as  being  a  new  one,  a  short  Explanation.  In 
order  to  give  a  distinct  View  of  the  Succession  of  Princes  in  the  chief 
Empires  or  Kingdoms,  without  employing  for  that  purpose  different 
columns,  which  distracts  too  much  the  attention,  and  occupies  unne- 
cessarily a  great  deal  of  space,  the  Series  of  the  Sovereigns  of  different 
Nations  is  distinguished  in  this  Table  by  their  being  printed  in  different 
Typographical  Characters.  Thus,  the  Series  of  the  Kings  and  Emper 
rors  of  Rome  is  printed  in  a  larger  Roman  Type  than  the  rest  of  the 

Table ;— ^as» 

» 

14  Tiberius  Emperor  of  Rome. 

THE  Series  of  the  Popes  is  distinguishable  by  this  character  ^[  pre<? 
fixed  to  each  name  ; — as, 

1513  f  Pope  Leo  X. 

THE  Names  of  the  Emperors  of  Germany  are  printed  in  Roman 
Capitals  ;— -as, 

887  ARNOLD,  Emperor  of  Germany. 

THE  Kings  of  England  are  marked  by  the  Black  Saxon  Type ; — as, 
1066  SIlilUclHX    (the   Conqueror)   King  of  England. 

TtfE  Kings  of  Scotland,  by  a  larger  Capital  beginning  the  word; — as 
1309   XVOBERT  III.  King  of  Scotland. 

AND  the  Kings  of  France  are  distinguished  by  the  Italic  Type ;— as 

1498  Louis  XII.  King  of  France. 
VOL.  I,  No.  3.  2  D 


[  210  ] 

BY  this  method  the  Succession  of  the  Sovereigns  in  the  different 
Kingdoms  is  immediately  distinguishable  to  the  eye,  as  well  as  the 
Duration  of  their  Reigns,  while  the  intervening  space  is  filled  by  the 
Remarkable  Events  that  occurred  in  that  Period  all  over  the  World  ; 
and  thus  the  connexion  of  General  History  is  preserved  unbroken.  A 
marginal  Column  is  added  of  ILLUSTRIOUS  PERSONS,  which,  being  ap- 
propriated chiefly  to  men  of  Learning  and  Genius,  presents  to  the 
Reader  a.  View  of  the  Progress  of  Science,  and  affords  an  easy  means  of 
forming  an  estimate  of  the  Literary  Character  of  any  particular  Age  in 
the  History  of  Mankind. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 


FOR  THE  BYZANTINE  HISTORIANS. 


Yrs. 
B.C 

4004  THE  Creation  of  the  World,  according  to  the  Hebrew 
text  of  the  Scriptures. 

According  to  the  version  of  the  Septuagint  5872. 

According  to  the  Samaritan  version  4700. 
2348  The  universal  Deluge. 
224?  The  building  of  Babel. — The  Dispersion  of  Mankind, 

and  the  Confusion  of  Languages. 
2217  Nimrod  supposed  to  have  built  Babylon,  and  founded 

the  Babylonish  Monarchy,  and  Assur  to  have  built 

Nineveh,  and  founded  the  Monarchy  of  Assyria. 
2188Menes  (in  Scripture  Misraim)  founds  the  Monarchy 

of  Egypt. 
2084  The  Shepherd  Kings  conquer  Egypt. 


2040 
1996 


1897  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  destroyed  by  fire  from  Heaven. 
1896' 


1856 
1836 


1823 
1796 
1722 
1635 


1571 
1556 
1546 


Mceris  King  of  Thebes  and  Memphis  in  Egypt. 
The  birth  of  Abram. 


Isaac  born. 

Inachus  founds  the  Kingdom  of  Argos  in  Greece. 

Jacob  and  Esau  born. 


1825  The  Shepherd  Kings  abandon  Egypt. 


Death  of  Abraham. 
The  Deluge  of  Ogyges  in  Attica. 
Sesostris  or  Kameses  King  of  Egypt. 
Joseph  dies  in  Egypt. 


1582  The  Chronology  of  the   Arundelian  Marbles  begins 
with  this  year 


Moses  born  in  Egypt. 

"Jecrops  founds  the  Kingdom  of  Athens. 

Scamander  founds  the  Kingdom  of  Troy. 


3532  Judgment  of  the  Areopagus  between  Mars  and  Nep. 

tune,  two  princes  of  Thessaly. 
1529  The  Deluge  of  Deucalion  in  Thessaly. 
1522  The  Council  of  the  Amphictyons  instituted. 
1520  Corinth  built. 
1506Erectheus  or  Erycthonius  institutes  the  Panathenaean 

Games. 
1493  Cadmus  builds   Thebes,  and  introduces  letters   into 

Greece. 

1491  Moses  brings  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt. 
1453  The  first  Olympic  Games  celebrated  in  Greece. 


Illustrious  Persona* 


1588  Atlas,  Asttonom, 


21  s! 


CRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 


Tw. 

I*.  C 

1452  The 

1451 

1438 

140(51  Minos 

1370 

1322 

1267 

1966 


the  j 


Pentateuch,  or  five  books  of  Moses,  written. 
The  Israelites  led  into  the  land  of  Canaan  by  Joshua. 
Pandion  King  of  Athens. 

.\Jinos  reigns  in  Crete,  and  gives  laws  to  the  Cretans. 
Sethos  reigns  in  Egypt. 
Bel  us  reigns  in  Babylon. 
Ninus  reigns  in  Assyria. 
(I'.dipus  marries  his   Mother   Jocasta,  and  reigns    in 

Thebes. 
The   Argonautic   Expedition. (According   to 

Newtonian  chronology  937). 
Theseus  unite*  the  Cities  of  Attica. 
Tyre,  the  capital  of  Phoenicia,  built. 
Siege  of  Thebes. — Wur  between  Eteocles  and  Poly- 

nices. 

Eurysthenes  and  Procles  Kings  of  Lacedsemon. 
War  of  Thebes,  or  war  of  the  Epigonoi. 
Semiramis  supposed  to  have  reigned  at  Babylon. 
Gideon  Judge  of  Israel. 
Fencer  built  Salamis. 
The  Trojan  war  begins. 
Troy  taken  and  burnt  by  the  Greeks.— (According  to 

the  Arundelian  Marbles  1209.) 
/Eneas  lands  in  Italy « 

amson  born. 

Return  of  the  Heraclidse  Into  Peloponnesus. 
Samuel   delivers  Israel. 
Saul  King  of  Israel. 

first  Archon  of  Athens. 

Codrus  King  of  Athens  devotes  himself  for  his  coun- 
try. 

David  King  of  Israel. 
Dedication  of  Solomon's  Temple. 
Kehoboam  King  of  Israeh 

Athaliah,  wife  of  Jehoram,  usurps  the  throne  of  Judah. 
Homer's  Poems  brought  from  Asia  into  Greece. 
Lycurgus  reforms  the  Constitution  of  Lacedaemon. 
The  city  of  Carthage  built  by  Dido. 
Nineveh  taken  by  Arbaces  and  Belesis,  which  finishes  373 

that  kingdom. 

FIRST  OLYMPIAD  begins  in  this  year. 
^ j  racuse  built  by  Archias  of  Coriuth. 
Sardanapalus  King  of  Assyria. 
The  Ephori,  popular  Magistrates,  instituted  at  Lace- 

dcemon. 

flalyattes  King  of  Lydia. 
Decennial  Archons  elected  at  Athens. 

Foundation  of  Rome  by  Rotimltis. 

Kape  of  the  Sabines. 

The  Era  of  Nabonassar  made  use  of  by  Ptolemy. 

Caudaules  King  of  Lydia. 

Hezekiah  tenth  King  of  Judah. 

Salmanazar  takes  Samaria,  and  carries  the  Ten  Tribes 

into  captivity,  which  puts  an  end  to  the  Israelitish 

kingdom. 


1257 
1225 

1215  Second 

1207 
1202 
1193 
1184 

1182 

1155S 

1104 

1099 

1079 

lO/O 

loGy 


1099  Samuel 


lO/O  Medon 


1055 
1040 

980  Kehoboam 

889 

886 

884 


820 


776  The 
7<>9  Sy 

767  ~' 
760 

757 

754 

752  The 

758 

747 

738 

724)Hezekiah 

721 


Illustrious  Person*. 


1430  Bacchus,  ob. 


1284  Orpheus,  Linus, 
ason,  Hercules,./?. 


1213  Nestor,  ft. 


IVfenelaus,  Ulysses,^. 
Sector,  Achilles, ,/2. 

I  ISO  Darus,  Phrygius, 

Hist.fi. 

Dictys,  Cret.  fl. 


1040  Sanchoniathon,jff. 

907  Homer,  Hesiod,  ft 
896  Elijah,  Prophet >ft. 


Lycnvgus,  ob% 
Elisha,  Prophet,  ob. 

/6s  Isaiah,  Prophet, 


~  Flin 

us'  Pl 


CHRONOLOGICAL  tABtE. 


213 


X.  C 

715 

71 

710 

708 

703 

696 

688 

68 

681 


672 

66? 
658 

640 
627 
6-26 


624 

616 

606 


601 


600 
599 
594 

678 
572 
571 
562 

551 
550 
548 


•538 


336 


534 


529 


522 
520 


PompiliuS,  second  King  of  Rome. 
Sennacherib,  King  of  Assyria,  invades  Judaea. 
Dejoces  King  of  Media. 
Halmkkuk  prophesied. 
Corey i a  founded  by  the  Corinthians. 
Manasseh  sixteenth  King  of  Judah.  '"  « 

Judith  kills  Holofernes  the  Assyrian  General* 
Annual  Archons  elected   at  Athens. 
Esarhaddon  unites  the  kingdoms  of  Babylon  and  As 
syria. 

Till  lllS  HostilillS,  third  King  of  Rome, 
PsamrnetiGus  King  of  Egypt. 
The  combat  between  the  Horatii  and  Curiatii. 
Byzantium  founded  by  Pausauias  King  of  Sparta. 
Phraortes  King  of  Media. 

AnCUS  MartillS  fourth  King  of  Rome. 

The  forty  years  of  Ezekiel  began. 

Periander  Tyrant  of  Corinth. 

Nabopolassar,  father  of  Nebuchadnezzar,    begins   to 
reign  at  Babylon. 

Draco,  Archon  and  Legislator  of  Athens. 
arqilinillS  PrisCUS,  fifth  King  of.  Rome. 

Nebuchadnezzar  takes  Jerusalem,  and  carries  tin 
Jew«  into  captivity. 

Battle  between  the  Medes  and  Lydians,  who  are  se 
parated  by  a  great  eclipse  of  the  sun,  predicted  b 
Thales.  (Newton.  Chron.  585.) 

End  of  the  Assyrian  Empire. — Nineveh  taken  by  Ne- 
buchadnezzar. 

Jeremiah  prophesied, 

Birth  of  Cyrus  the  Great. 

Solon,  Archon  and  Legislator  of  Athens. 

TullillS  sixth  King  of  Rome. 
Nebuchadnezzar  subdues  Egypt. 


Phalaris  Tyrant  of  Agrigentum. 

Comedies  first  exhibited  at  Athens  by  Thespis. 

CJroesus  reigns  in  Lydia. 

Confucius,  the  Chinese  Philosopher,-born. 

Pisistratus  Tyrant  of  Athens. 

The  ancient  temple  of  Delph,os  burnt  by  the  Pisistra- 
tidse. 

Babylon    taken   by    Cyrus. — End  of  the   Babyloniah 

Empire. 

'yrus  ascends  the  throne  of  Persia. — He  puts  an  eric 
to  the  Jewish  captivity,which  had  lasted  seventy  years. 

TarquilliuS  SuperbuS,  seventh  Ki«g  of  Rome. 

Daniel  prophesied. 

Death  of  Cyrus  the  Great, — Carnbyses  King  of  Persia. 

Death  of  Pisistratus  Tyrant  of  Athens. 

Darius,  son  of  Hystaspes,  King  of  Persia. 

The  Jews   begin  to  build   the  second  temple,  which  i.u 

finished  in  four  years. 
510  The  Pisistratidae  expelled  from  Athens,  and  the   De- 
mocracy restored. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Archilochns,  Poet. 
Tyrta-us,  Poet. 

Terpander,^?. 


Alcman,^?. 
iitesiehoras,./?. 


Arion,  Musician^  ft, 
)lj   Pittacus   of    Mity. 

leue. 
—  Bias  of  Priene. 


Sappho,  Poetess,  fl. 


90  Memnermus.  Po  fl. 


eremiah,  Prophet  ,ob. 
Esop,  Fab.       > 
6-2  Cadmus  of  Miletus, 
Hist.fl. 

—  Pherecydes  of  Scyros, 
Phil.J. 

58  Solon,  ob. 
56  Chilo  of   Lacedae- 
num.  &'* 

54  Anacharsis  of  Scy- 

llna. 
48  Thales,  PAi/.  ob. 

—  Theognis,  Poet,Jl. 
47  Anaximander,  ob. 

—  Phocylides,  Poet,  ft. 
46  Orpheus,  jl* 

44  Bion,  Poet,Jl. 


nacreon,  Poet^Jl. 

cylax,  Gen*. 
iogcnes,  Phil,  born* 


t!4 

Yrs 

J&.C 

51 


50< 
50 

50 
49' 
49' 

493 


488 


48( 


48 

483 


48( 


479 


477 
470 


471 

470 


469 
464 


463 


450 


455 


453 


452 


451 


449 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 


Statues  erected  at  Athens  to  Harmodius  and  Aristo 

giton. 
The  Tarquins  expelled  from  Rome,  and  the  Rega 

government  abolished. 
The  first  alliance  between  the  Romans  and  Cartha 

ginians. 

Sardis  taken  and  burnt  by  the  Athenians. 
The  first  Dictator  created  at  Rome,  (Lartius). 
Institution  of  the  Saturnalia  at  Rome. 
The  port  of  Piraeus  built  by  the  Athenians. 
The  Battle  of  Marathon,  jn  which  Miltiadea  defeat 

the  Persians. 
The  first  Tribunes  of  the  people  created  at  Rome. — 

(According  to  Blair  493). 
Miltiade^  dies  in  prison. 
Xerxes  succeeds  his  father  Darius  in  the  kingdom  o 

Persia. 

Coriolanus  banished  from  Rome. 
Quaestors  instituted  at  Rome. 
Aristides  banished  from  Athens  by  the  Ostracism. 
The  Spartans,  under  Leonidas,  cut  to  pieces  at  Ther- 
mopylae. 
Naval  victory  gained  by  the  Greeks  over  the  Persian 

at  Sal  a  mis. 

Attica  laid  waste,  and  Athens  burnt,  by  Mardonius. 
Victories  over  the  Persians  at  Platsea  and  Mycale. 
Xerxes  leaves  Greece. 
300  Fabii  killed  by  the  Veientes. 
Themistocles  rebuilds  Athens. 
Valerius  triumphs  over  the  Veientes  and  Sabines* 
The  Roman  citizens  numbered  at  103,000. 
A  great  eruption  of  jEtna. 
hliero  King  of  Syracuse. 
Volero,  the  Roman  Tribune,  obtains  a  law  for  the 

election  of  magistrates  in  the  comitia  held  by  tribes. 

imon,  son   of  Miltiades,  defeats  the   Persian  army 

and  fleet   in  one  day,  at  the  mouth   of  the   river 

Eurymedon. 

'apua  founded  by  the  Tuscans. 
Artaxerxes  (Longinianus)  King  of  Persia. 

on  ImiiUhed  by  the  Ostracism. 
Egypt  revolts  from  the  Persians. 
The  Terentian  law  proposed  at  Rome. 
Jincinatns  Dictator  at  Rome. 
The  Ludi  Seeculares  first  instituted  at  Rome. 
Commencement  of  the  Seventy  Prophetical  Weeks  of 

Daniel. 
The  number  of  the  Tribunes  of  the  people  at  Rome 

increased  from  five  to  ten. 
The  two  books  of  Chronicles  supposed   to  ha,ve  been 

written  at  this  time  by  Ezra. 
Creation  of  the  Decemviri  at  Rome,  and  Compilation 

of  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables. 
*eace  between  the  Greeks  and  Persians  concluded  by 

Cimon,  glorious  for  Greece. 
)eath  of  Virginia,  and  abolition  of  the  Decemvirate. 


illustrious  Person*. 

Heraclitos,  Pl.il.  jf. 

Anaximenes,  Phil,  o^* 
Pythagoras,  ob. 

Theano,  Phil../?. 
Simouides,  Poet.  ft. 


Confucius,  Chinese* 
Phil.  06. 


Zeno,  Phil./, 


£schylos,  Poet,  ob, 
Democritus, 


iriatarchus,  Crit.  fl. 
LeucippusjPhil./, 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


2  IS 


Yrs. 

B.  C. 

445 


437 
436 
432 
431 

430 


428 
423 
418 

414 
413 

412 
405 
404 

m    ii    urn 

403 
401 


399 
397 
396 
391 

387 

385 

£82 
380 

371 
364 

363 
362 
361 

358 


337 
356 


The  Law  of  Canuleius  for  the  intermarriage  of  the 
Patricians  and  Plebeians  at  Rome. 

Military  Tribunes  created. 

The  Censorship  first  instituted  at  Rome. 

Pericles  in  high  power  at  Athens. 

Meton's  nineteen  years  Cycle  of  the  Moon. 

The  Peloponnesian  war  begins,  -which  lasted  twenty- 
seven  years. 

The  History  of  the  Old  Testament  ends  about  this 
time. 

Great  Plague,  at  Athens,  eloquently  described  by 
Thucydides. 

Malachi  the  last  of  the  Prophets. 

Death  of  Pericles. 

Darius  Nothus  King  of  Persia. 

Disturbances  at  Rome  on  account  of  the  Agrarian 
Law. 

The  Athenians  defeated  before  Syracuse. 

Alcibiades,  accused  at  Athens,  flies  to  the  Lacedae- 
monians. 

A  Council  of  400  governs  Athens. 

Lysander  defeats  the  Athenians  at  uEgosPotamos. 

Artaxerxes  II.  (Mnemon)  King  of  Persia. 

End  of  the  Peloponnesian  war. 

Lysander  takes  Athens.— -Government  of  the  Thirty 
Tyrants. 

The  Younger  Cyrus  defeated  by  his  brother  Arta- 
xerxes, and  killed. 

Retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand  Greeks. 

Persecution  and  death  of  Socrates. 

Thrasybulus  drives  ou*  the  Thirty  Tyrants,  and  de- 
livers Athens. 

A  Lectisternium  celebrated  at  Rome  for  the  first  time. 

The  Lake  of  Alba  drained  by  the  Romans, 

Syracuse  unsuccessfully  besieged  by  the  Carthaginians. 

Marcus  FuriusCamiilus  Dictator  at  Rome. — Veii  taken. 

Dishonourable  peace  of  Antalcidas  between  the  Spar- 
tans and  Persians. 

Rome  taken  by  the  Gauls  under  Brennus. 

Phaebidas,  the  Spartan,  seizes  the  citadel  of  Thebes. 

Pelopidas  and  Epaminondas  deliver  Thebes  from  the 
Lacedaemonians. 

Battle  of  Leuctra,  in  which  the  Lacedaemonians  are 
defeated  by  the  Thebans  under  Epaminondas. 

Pelopidas  defeats  the  Tyrant  of  Pheraea,  but  is  killed 
in  battle. 

Battle  of  Mantinea,  in  which  Epaminondas  is  killed. 

Curtius  leaps  into  a  gulph  in  the  Forum  at  Rome. 

Darius  Ochus  (or  Artaxerxes  111,)  King  of  Persia. — 
(According  to  Blair,  358). 

War  of  the  Allies  against  Athens. 

Philip  of  Macedoii  takes  Amphipolis,  Pydna,  and 
Potidea. 

Dion  overcomes  the  party  of  Dionvsius  at  Syracuse. 

Alexander  the  Great  born  at  Pellain  Macedonia. 

The  Temple  of  Diana,  at  Ephesus,  burnt  by  Erostratus, 


Illustrious  Persons. 


444  Herodotus,  Hist.  Jl. 

Empedoclcs,  Phil.  fl. 
— Parmenides,  Phil  fi, 

435  Pindar,  ob. 
432  Phidias,  tic.  ob. 


Anaxagoras,  Phil.  «$. 
415  Meton,  ob.post. 


407  Euripides,  nb. 
406  Sophocles,  ob. 


lebes,./?.— Euclid,  PW. 


397  Xeuxis,  Paint,  JE 
Socrates,  ob. 
Thucydides,  Hist.  oS, 

389  Aristophanes,  ob. 
tesias,  Hist.  ob. 

378  Lysias, Or.o5. 


Pelopidas,  ob. 


Democritus,  Abd.  o5. 
361  Hippocrates,  ob. 
359  Xenophon,  Hist.  o&. 


910 

Yrs. 
B.  C 
,  336  The 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


350 

348 

347 
346 
343 


340  The 


338 

337 
336 


335 
334 

333 
332 
331 
330 

328 


325 
324 
321 

320 
317 
312 
311 

504 
303 
301 


300 

'298 
294 


Phocian  or  Sacred  War  begins  in  Greece. 

Philip  conquers  the  Thracians,  Pseomuns,  and  Illyrians. 

Darius  Ochus  subdues  Egypt. 

Philip  of  Macedon  takes  Olynthus. 

End  of  the  Sacred  War. 

Dionysius    restored  at  Syracuse,  after  an  exile  of  ten 
years. 

Philip    admitted    a    Member   of    the   Amphictyouic 
Council. 

Syracuse  taken  by  Timoleou,  and  Dionysius  the  Tyrant 
finally  banished. 

The  war  between  the  Romans  and  Samnites,  which  led 
to  the  conquest  of  all  Italy. 

Carthaginians  defeated  near  Agrigentum. 

P.  Decius  devotes  himself  to  his  country. 

Battle  of  Cheronaea  gained  by  Philip  over  the  Athe- 
nians andThebans. 

Philip  chosen  Generalissimo  of  the  Greeks. 

Philip  murdered  by  Pausanias. 

Alexander  the  Great  King  of  Macedon. 

Alexander  the  Great  destroys  Thebes. 

Darius  III.  (Codomannus),  King  of  Persia. 

Alexander  chosen  Generalissimo  by  the  States  of  Greece. 

Alexander   defeats   the  Persians  on   the  bankf  of  the 
Granicus. 

The  Persians  defeated  by  Alexander  at  Issus. 

Alexander  conquers  Egypt,  and  takes  Tyre. 

Darius  defeated  by  Alexander  at  Arbela. 

DariusCodomannuskilled.    End  of  the  Persian  empire. 

Alexander  takes  possession  of  Susa,  and  sets  tire  to  the 
palace  of  Persepolis, 

Alexander  passes  into  India,  defeats  Porus,  founds  se- 
veral cities,  penetrates  to  the  Ganges. 

The  voyage  of  Nearchus  from  the  Indus  to  the  Eu- 
phrates. 

Papirius  Cursor,  Dictator  at  Rome,  triumphs  over  the 
Samnites. 

Alexander  the  Great  dies  at  Babylon,  at  the  age  of 
thirty-three. 

The  Samnites  make  the  Roman  army  pass  under  the 
yoke  at  Caudium. 

Ptolemy  carries  100,000  Jews  captives  in  Egypt. 

Agathocles  Tyrant  of  Syracuse. 

Era  of  the  Seleucidae. 

Cassander,  Lysimachus,and  Ptolemy,  conclude  a  peace 
with  Antigouus. 

Demetrius  besieges  Rhodes. 

Demetrius  restores  the  Greek  cities  to  their  liberty. 

Battle  of  Ipsus  in  Phrygia,  in  which  Antigonus  is  de- 
feated and  slain. 

Fabius  Maximus  and  Valerius  Corvus  Dictators. 

Seleucus  founds  Antioch,  Edessa,  and  Laodicea. 

Athens  taken  by  Demetrius  Poliorcetes. 

Seleucus  resigns  his  wife  Stratonice  to  his  son  Antio- 
chus. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Plato, ob. 


[socrates,Or.  ob. 

Parrhasius,  Paint../?. 
Apelles,Paint./. 


326  Lycippus,  Sc.jff. 


Diogenes,  Phil.  o5. 

322  Demost.  Or.  oft. 
—  Aristotle,  ob. 


Pyrrho,  Phil.oS. 


Arcesilaus,   Math.JI. 

Euclid,  Math.  ft. 

293  Menander,  Poet,  00, 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


217 


Law  of  Hortensius,  by  which  the  decrees  of  the  people  288  Praxiteles,  Sc.  ob. 


Yrs. 
£.  C 
286,  _ 

were  all-owed  the  same  force  as  those  of  the  senate. 
285|The  astronomical  era  of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria. 
284  Ptolemy  Philadelphus  King  of  Egypt. 
283  The  Library  of  Alexandria  founded. 
281  Commencement  of  the  Achaean  League. 
2gO  Pyrrbus  invades  Italy. 
--  Antiochus  Soter  King  of  Syria. 
277|The  translation  of  the  Septuagint  made  by  order  oJ 

Ptolemy  Philadelphus.—  (Playfair,  285). 
Antigonus   Gonatas   reigned    in    Macedon   thirty-sixl 

years. 
Pyrrhus   unsuccessful   against   the 

Sicily. 
Pyrrhus,  totally  defeated   by  the  Romans  near  Berie- 

ventum,  evacuates  Italy. 
The  Samnites  finally  subdued  by  the  Romans. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


post. 


Theophrastus,^. 

284  Demetrius  Phal  fl. 

283  Theocritus,  Poet,^?. 


275 
274 


272 


Carthaginians 


n 


270  Epicurus,  Phil.  ob. 
268  Berosus,  Hist../?. 


266lSilver  money  is  coined  at  Rome  for  the  first  time. 
265  The  citizens  of  Rome  numbered  at  292,224. 
264  The  first  Punic  war  begins.  —  The  Chronicle  of  Paros  Zeno,  Phil.  ob. 
composed. 


260 


255 


253 
25! 
250 


241 


Provincial  Quaestors  instituted  at  Rome. 

First  naval  victory  obtained  by  the  Romans  under  the 

Consul  Duilius. 
Regulus  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  by  the  Cartha- 

ginians under  Xantippus. 
Manasseh  chosen  High  Priest  of  the  Jews. 
Great  victory  of  Metellus  over  Asdrubal. 


26l  Manetho,HisM. 


Crit../?. 


Aratus  of  sic 


The   Romans  besiege    Lilybreum, — are  defeated    by  247  Jesus  son  of  Sa-ach. 

Hamilcar. 
End  of  the  first  Punic  war.  244  Callimachus,  Po./. 


Attains  King  of  Pergamus  succeeds  Eumenes. 
240  Comedies  are  first  acted  at  Rome. 

235|The  Temple  of  Janus  shut  for  the  first  time  since  the|Llv'  *  :us>p 

reign  of  Numa. 


228 


219 

218 
217 

216 


212 


Hamilcar  killed  in  Spain. 


225  Great  victory  of  the  Romans  over  the  Gauls. 


Fabius  Pictor,  Hist../?. 


Hannibal  takes  Saguntum. 
The  second  Punic  War  begins. 
Hannibal  defeats  the  Romans  under  Flaminius. 
Fabius  Maximus  Dictator. 

Battle  of  Cannae,  in  which  the  Romans  are  totally  de- 
feated by  Hannibal. 

Philip  II.  of  Macedori  defeats  the  ./Etolians. 
Marcellus  takes  Syracuse,  after  a  siege  of  two  years.        Archimedes,  Math.  ob. 
Capua  surrenders  to  the  Romans. 


Antiochus  the  Great  conquers  Judea. 
210  Asdrubal  vanquished  in  Spain  by  the  Scipios. 

PubliusScipio  sent  into  Spain,  takes  New  Carthage. 

206|PhiIopcemen  Praetor  of  the  Achseans. 

The  Carthaginians  recal  Hannibal  to  Africa. 

Sophonisba  poisoned  by  Massinissa. 

Syphax  led  in  triumph  to  Rome  by  P.Scipio. 

Philip  defeated  by  the  Romans  atCynocephale. 

The   battle  of  Zama,  ^ind  end  of  the  second  Pun'cl 


203 


201 
197 


203 


ar. 


918 

r«. 
B.  c 

J90 


CRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


The  Romans  enter  Asia,  and    defeat   Antigonus  at 
Magnesia.         « 
183  The  elder  Cato  Censor  at  Rome. 

173  War  between  the  Romans  and  Perseus  King  of  Mace- 
don. 

172  Antiochus  defeats  the  generals  of  Ptolemy  in  Egypt. 
170  Antiochus  Epiphanes  takes  and  plunders  Jerusalem. 
169  Terence's  comedies  performed  at  Rome. 
167  Perseus  defeated  by  Paulus  JLmilius,  and  brought  pri- 
soner to  Rome.     End  of  the  kingdom  of  Macedon. 
166  Judas  Maccabeus  drives  the  Syrians  out  of  Judea. 
164  The  Roman  citizens  numbered  at  327,032. 
149  The  third  Punic  War  begins. 
147  Metellus  defeats  the  Achseans. 
146  Corinth  taken  by  the  Consul  Mummius. 

Carthage  taken  and  destroyed  by  the  Romans. 
137  The  Romans  shamefully  defeated  by  the  Numantines. 
135  The  history  of  the  Apocrypha  ends. 

Antiochus  besieges  Jerusalem. 
133  Tiberius  Gracchus  put  to  death. 

Numantia  taken.     Pergamus  becomes  a  Roman  pro- 
vince. 

121  Caius  Gracchus  killed. 
113  Carbo  the  Consul  drives  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones  out 

of  Italy. 

Ill  The  Jugurthine  War  begins. 
108  Mari  us  defeats  Jugurtha. 
103  Jugurtha  starved  to  death  at  Rome. 
J02  Mari  us  defeats  the  Teutones  and  Cirnbri. 
91  The  war  of  the  Allies  against  the  Romans. 
Sylla  defeats  the  Marsi,  Peligni,  Samnites,  &c. 
The  Mithridatic  War  begins. 

Civil  war  between  Marius  a^nd  Sylla. — Sylla  takes  pos- 
session of  Rome. 

Mithridates  King  of  Pontus  defeated  by  Sylla. 
"a  defeats  Norbanu?. — The  Capitol  burnt, 
la  perpetual  Dictator. — His  horrible  proscription, 
ius  Caesar  makes  his  first  campaign, 
icero's  first  oration  for  Roscius. 
Sylla  resigns  all  power, — and  dies. 
The  War  of  Sertorius. 

Lucullus  repeatedly  defeats  Mithridates,  and  reduces 
Pontus  to  a  Roman  Province, 
rassus  and  Pompey  chosen  Consuls  at  Rome. 
Victories  of  Pompey. — He  takes  Jerusalem,  and   re- 
stores Hyrcanus  to  the  government  of  Judaea. 
Catiline's  conspiracy  quelled  at  Rome  by  Cicero. 
Pompey  enters  Rome  in  triumph. 
The  first  Triumvirate — Pompey,  C  rassus,  and  Csesar. 
Caesar  proposes  a  new  Agrarian  law. 
Clodius  the  Tribune  procures  the  banishment  of  Ci- 
cero. 

Caesar  defeats  Ariovistus  in  Gaul. 
Cicero  brought  back  from  exile  with  high  honour. 
Caesar  lands  in  Britain  for  a  short  campaign. 


89 

83 

86 

83  Syll 

82Syll 

80  Jdlius 

79  C 

78 

77 

72 

70  C 
63 

62 
6l 
59 


58 

09 

i    .- 

55 


Illustrious  Persons. 


185  Philopoemen,  ob. 
184  Plautus,  Poet,  ob- 


69  Ennius,  Poet,  ob. 


^tecilius,  Poet,  ob. 

59  Terence,  Poet,  ob. 

56  Aristarchus,  Gr.  ot>. 


40  CritolawSjPhil.  ob. 
39  Accius,Tr.  P.  ob. 

131  Pacuvius,Tr.  P.  oft. 
128  Carneades,  Phil.  ob. 
124  Polybius,  Hist.  ob. 


1 1 5  Apollodorus,  Gr.ob. 
Lucilius,  Poet,  ob. 

Alexander  Polyh.  j?. 
84  Cinna,  ob. 

73  Sertorius,  ob. 


Terentius  Varro,  Jt. 
Hortensfus,  Oral../?. 

T.  Pomp.  Atticus,  ft, 
Asinius  1'ollio,// 


Lucretius,  Poet,  ob. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


210 


Yrs.               k                                                                                                          Illustrious  Persons. 

B.C 

54 

Caesar  invades  Britain  a  second  time,  and  conquers  a 

part  of  the  country. 

53 

Crassus  killed  in  Mesopotamia. 

52 

Milo  defended  by  Cicero  for  the  slaughter  of  Clodius. 

51  Possidonius,  ob.post. 

49 

Caesar  passes  the  Rubicon,  and  marches  to  Rome. 

49  Trogus  Porapeius  ft. 

Commencement  of  the   era  of  Antioch,  October  49 

A.  C. 

48 

Battle  of  Pharsalia,  in  which  Pompey  is  defeated. 

Pompey  slain  in  Egypt. 

The  Alexandrian  Library  of  400,000  volumes  burnt. 

46 
45 

Cato  besieged  in  Utica,  —  kills  himself. 
The  Kalender  reformed  by  Julius  Caesar,  by  fntrodu- 

46  Alex.  Polyhistor,,/?. 

cing  the  Solar  Year  instead  of  the  Lunar.  —  The  first 

Julian  Year  began  1st  January  45  A.  C. 

44 

Julius  Caesar  killed  in  the  Senate-house. 

44  Julius  Caesar,  ob. 

—  ,  — 

Octavius,    grand-nephew  and   heir   of  Julius   Caesar, 

Diod.  Siculus,  Hist.^. 

comes  to  Rome,  and  is  opposed  at   first   by   An- 

43 

tony. 
Second   Triumvirate  —  Octavius,   Mark   Antony,   anc 

T              •    1 

M.  T.  Cicero,  ob. 
A.  Hirtius,  Hist.  ft. 

Lepidus. 

42 

Battle  of  Philippi,  in  which  Brutus  and   Cassius  are 

defeated. 

40 

Herod    marries   Mariamne,    daughter    of    Hyrcanus, 
and  obtains  from  the   Romans  the   government  oi 

40  Catullus,  Poct,^. 
M.  Junius  Brutus,^. 

34 

Judaea. 
Antony  divides  Armenia  among  the  Children  of  Cleo- 
patra, 

35  Sallustus,  Hist.  ob. 
Pub.  Syrus,  Poet,^. 

33 

t^         *       9 

Mauritania  reduced  into  a  Roman  province. 

ManiSlius,  Poet,  ft. 

32 

War  declared  by  the  Senate  against  Antony  and  Cleo- 

33 Dioscorides,  Phy.  ob. 

patra. 

Corn.  Gallus,  Poet}i/?. 

*81 

Battle  of  Actium,  and  end  of  the  Roman  Common- 

Messala Corvinus,  Hist. 

wealth. 

fi. 

. 

Octavius  Emperor  of  Rome. 

30 

Death  of  Mark  Antony  and  Cleopatra.     Alexandria 

taken  by  Octavius. 

27 
23 
20 

Dctavius  receives  the  title  of  Augustus. 
Death  of  Marcellus.  —  Agrippa  in  Spain. 
Porus  King  of  India  sends  an  embassy  to  Augustus. 

Propertius,  Poet,  ft. 
25  Corn.  Nepos,Hist.o6. 

17 

Augustus  revives  the  secular  games. 

19  Virgilius  Maro,  ob. 

15 

The  Rhaeti  and  Vindelici  defeated  by  Drusus. 

Vitruvius,  Afch.^. 

10 

The  temple  of  Janus  shut  by  Augustus  for   a  short 

12  M.  V.  Agrippa,  ob. 

time. 

3rat.  Faliscus,  Poet.^. 

8 

Augustus  corrects  an  error  of  the  Roman  Kalendar, 

Boratius  Flaccus,  ob. 



Death  of  Mrecenas. 

fl 

Augustus  ordains  a  census  of  all  the  people  in  the  Ro- 

man empire. 

4 

JESUS  CHRIST  is  born  four  years  before  the  com- 

V. Damascenus,  vb. 

mencement  of  the  vulgar  era. 

Labeo,  Capito,  Icti,^?. 

Yrs. 

D 

Hyginus,  Math./. 

A.  C 
9 

The  Roman  legions,  under  Yarus,  cut  to  pieces  in 
Germany. 

4  Phsedrus,  Poet,  ft. 
sDionysius  Hal.  Histj?. 
Titus  Livius,  Hist,  oi» 

„  , 

)vid  the  Poet  banished  to  Tomos. 

17  Ovidius,  Poet.oi. 

14 

Tiberius  Emperor  of  Rome. 

Tibullus,  Poet.  ob. 

19 

jrermanicus  dies  at  Antioch. 

17  Celsus,  Med.  fl. 

-<— 

Tiberius  banishes  the  Jews  from  Rome* 

23  Valerius  Max.  fl, 

220 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Yr9. 
A.  C 


26  John  the  Baptist  preaches  in  Judaea  the  coming  of  the  25  Strabo,  Gteo.  06. 

Messiah. 

27  Tiberius  retires  to  the  island  of  Caprese. 
Pilate  made  Governor  of  Judaea. 

3J  Sejanus  disgraced,  and  put  to  death  by  Tiberius. 
33  ^  St  Peter  first  Pope. 

JESUS  CHRIST  is  crucified. 

35  The  conversion  of^St  Paul. 

37  Caligula  Emperor  of  Rome. 

39  St  iMatthevr  writes  his  gospel. 

40  The  name  of  Christians  first  given  to  the  disciples  of 

Christ  at  Antioch. 

41  Claudius  Emperor  of  Rome. 

—  Herod   persecutes  the  Christians,  and  imprisons  Peter. 

42  Sergius  Paulus,  proconsul,  converted  by  St  Paul. 

43  Expedition  of  Claudius  into  Britain. 

44  St  Mark  writes  his  Gospel. 

45  Vespasian  in  Britain. 

47  The  Ludi  Scecularts  performed  at  Rome. 

48  Messalina   put   to  death    by    Claudius,   who  marries 

Agrippina,  the  mother  of  Nero. 

50  St  Paul  preaches  in  the  Areopagus  at  Athens. 

51  Caractacus,  the  British  King,  is   carried    prisoner  to 

Koine. 

54  Nero  Emperor  of  Rome. 

55  Britannicus  poisoned  by  Nero, 
5<)Nero  puts  to  death  his  mother  Agrippina. 
CO  Suetonius  Paulinus  defeats  the  Britons. 

The  Britons,  under  Queen  Boadicea,  defeat  the  Ro- 
mans. 


66 


67 


68 
69 


70 


78 


79 


80 
81 
83 


The  first  persecution  of  the  Christians  raised  by  Nero. 

Rome  set  on  fire  by  Nero. 

Bareus  Soranus  and  Thrasea  Paetus  put  to  death  bv 

Nero. 
1[  Pope  Linns. 
Massacre  of  the  Jews  by   Florus,  at  Csasarea,  Ptole- 

mais,  and  Alexandria. 
St  Peter  and  St  Paul  put  to  death. 
Josephus,  the  Jewish  historian,  governor  of  Galilee. 
H  Pope  St  Clement. 

Galba  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Otho  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Vitellius  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Vespasian  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Jerusalem  taken  and  destroyed  by  Titus. 
If  Pope  St  Cletus. 
A   great   pestilence  at  Rome,  10,000   dying   in   one 
day 

itus  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  destroyed  by  an  eruption 

of  Vesuvius. 

Conquests  of  Agricola  in  Britain. 
Domitian  Emperor  of  Rome. 

Pope  Auacletus. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Velleius  Paterculus,  ob. 
32  John  the  Baptist,  oft. 
— Columella,  fl. 


37  Isodorus,  Geo.  fl. 
Philo  Judaeus,  fl. 


42  Asinius  Pollio,  fl. 


45  Pomp.  Mela,  Geo.  fl. 


50  Aretaeus  Capp.  ob. 


56  Cornutus,  Phil.  fl. 

Apollonius  Tyanensis,fl. 
Quint  Curtius,  Hist.fi. 

52  Persins  Sat.  ob. 

65  An.  Seneca,  Phil.  ob. 
— An.   Lucanus,  Po.  ob. 

66  Petronius  Arb.  ob. 
Dioscorides,  Med.  fl. 


74  Silius  Italicus,  Poet, 
ob. 
lemens,  Rumanus,  fl. 


liny  Eider,  Nat.  Hist 
Florus,  Hist.  fl. 
84  Valerius  Flaccus, 
Poet,  fl. 


A.C 

SQ 

95 


96 


6s 


100 
103 
10? 
108 


117 
118 


120 
127 
131 
132 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Apollonius  of  Tyanea  defends  himself  before  Domitian 

against  an  accusation  of  treason. 
Dreadful  persecution  of  the  Christians  at  Ronre,   and 

in  the  provinces. 
St  John  writes  his  Apocalypse. 

writes  his  Gospel. 

Nerva  Emperor  of  Rome. 

Pooe  Evaristus. 
Trajan  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Trajan  forbids  the  Christian  Assemblies. 

The  Dacians  subdued  by  Trajan. 

Trajan's  victories  in  Asia. 

St  Ignatius  devoured  by  wild  beasts  at  Rome. 


221 


200,000   Greeks   and 


Pope  Alexander  I. 
The   Jews    in  Cyrene  murder 

Romans. 
f  Pope  Sixtus  I. 
Adrian  Emperor  of  Rome. 
Persecution  of  the  Christians  renewed  by   Adrian,  but 

afterwards  suspended. 

Adrian's  wall  built  across  the  island  of  Britain. 
H"  Pope  Telesphorus. 
Adrian  visits  Egypt  and  Syria. 

publishes   his  perpetual   edict  or  code   of  the 

laws. 
The  Romans  destroyed  580,000  Jews  in  Judaea. 


Adrian  rebuilds  Jerusalem  by  the  name  of  JEl'ia  Capi- 


135 
137 

tolina. 
138«J[  Pope  Hyginus. 

AntoninUS  Pius  Emperor  of  Rome. 
142  ^  Pope  Pius  I. 
150^y  Pope  Anicetus. 
154  Justin   Martyr  publishes  his   Apology  for  the  Chris- 

-    tians. 

Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus,  and  Lu- 
cius VerUS,  Emperors  of  Rome. 
l62^[PopeSoter. 
167 
169 
171 

— 

177 

180 


Illustrious  Persons. 


9oMartialis,  Poet,  ob. 
— Dio  Chrysostom,  06, 
93  Josephus,  Hist.  ob. 

95  Quinctilian,  Gr  ofiu 

96  Statius,  Poet,  ob. 
Sulpitia,  Poet,  fl. 
99  Tacitus,  Hist.  ob. 
— Julius  Frontiuus,  06. 


103  Pliny  Junior,  fl. 


Polycarp  and  Pionices  suffered  martyrdom  in  Asia. 

War  with  the  Marcomanni. 

Death  of  Verus.     Marcus  Aurelius  sole  Emperor. 

Pope  Eleutherius. 
Persecution  of  the  Christians  at  Lyons. 

CommoduS  Emperor  of  Rome. 


185^[  Pope  Victor  I 
189  The  Saracens  defeat  the  Romans. — This  people  for  the 
first  time  mentioned  in  history. 

193  Pertinax  Emperor  of  Rome.— Didius  Julia- 

nUS  purchases  the  empire. 

PeSCeiiniuS  Niger    declared    Emperor    in    the 
East. 

SeptimiuS  SeverUS  Emperor  of  Home. 
194JNiger  defeated  by  Severus,  and  put  to  death.  d 


119  Plutarch,  ob. 

.  Suetonius,  Hist,  fl, 
128  Juvenal,  Poet,  ob. 

30  Aul.  Gellius,  ob. 

El.  Adrianus,  fl. 
4rrian,  Hist:  &  Phil,  fl, 
Terrentianus  Maurus,fi. 
ustin  Martyr,  fl. 


140  jElian,  Hist. ob. 
L.  Apuleius,  fl. 

Ptolemy,  Geo£.  fl. 
148  Appiau,  Hist.  ob. 

M-  Antoninus,  Phil.  fl. 
Epictetus,  Phil. ob. 

163  Pausanias,  Hist.  ob. 
165  Polycarp,  Bish.  fl, 
167  Justin,  Hist,  fl 
l/o  Demetrius  Phaler, 

ob. 


Lucian,  ob. 
Julius,  Pollux,  ob. 
Herotlianus,  Hist.  fl. 
lamblichus,  Poet.  fl. 

alen,  Pnys.  ob. 
Sextus  Empiricus,  fl. 
Maximus  Tyriu8,Phil.fl. 


Plotinos,  Phil.  fl. 
lulius  Soliuus,  fl 


222 

Yr.«. 

A.C 
195 
196 

197 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLK. 


•200 


226 
230 
23 


237 

238 


Byzantium  besieged,  surrenders  to  Severus. 
AlbinUS  proclaimed  Emperor  in  Britain. 

.  defeated  by  Severus,  he  kills  himself. 

Pope  Zephyrinus. 


The  fifth  persecution  against  the  Christians,  principally 
in  Egypt. 

208  Severus,  with  his  sons  Caracallaand  Geta,  in  Britain. 

209  The  Caledonians  repulsed,   and  a  wall  built  between 

the  rivers  Forth  and  Clyde. 

21 1  Caracal  la  and  Geta  Emperors  of  Rome. 

Caracalla  murders  Geta. 

217  Caracalla  put  to  death. 
MacrinUS  Emperor  of'Home. 
^F  Pope  Calixtus  I. 

218  HeliogabaluS  Emperor  of  Rome. 

222  Alexander  SeverUS  Emperor  of  Rome. 
A  tribute  paid  by  the  Romans  to  the  Goths. 
IF  Pope  Urban  I. 
The  Persians  totally  defeated  by  Alexander  Severus. 


Illustrious  Persons 


196  Athenaeus,  ob. 
Tertullian,  ob. 


202  Treneaus,  ob. 

U-t'sippus,  Hist.  11. 

Dionysius  Cato,  Poet,fl. 
Philostratus,  fl. 

206  Clemens  Alex.  fl. 

207  Minucius  Felix,  fl. 
Papinianus  ob. 


213  Oppian,  Poet,  ob. 


220  Julius  Africanus,  fl, 
Diogenes  Laertes,  ob. 
^lianus,  Hist.fl. 


Pope  Pontianus. 
Pope  Anterus. 

[aximjnUS  assassinates  Alexander  Severus,  and  J«Hus  Paulus 
is  proclaimed  Emperor  of  Rome. 
236  The  sixth  persecution  of  the  Christians. 
Pope  Fabianus. 


229  Dion  Cassius,  fl. 
Ulpianus,  fl. 

,  fl. 
L.  Pomponius,  fl. 


Maxi minus  defeats  the  Dacians  and  Sacmatians. 

MaximUS  and  BalbinUS  Emperors  of  Rome. 

Gordian  Emperor  of  Rome. 

Gordian  defeats  the  Persians  under  Sapor. 

Philip  the  Arabian  Emperor  of  Rome. 

The  Secular  Games  celebrated  at  Rome. — Pompey's 


242 
244 
248 

Theatre  burnt. 
jSt.  Cyprian  elected  Bishop  of  Carthage. 

249  Decius  Emperor  of  Rome. 

250  The   seventh    persecution    of    the    Christians   under 

Decius. 
^F  Pope  St.  Cornelius. 

251  VibiuS  VolusianuS  Emperor  of  Rome. 
GalluS  Emperor  of  Rome. 

252  IF  Pope  Lucius  I. 

253  The  Goths,  Burgundians,  &c.  make  an  irruption  ipto 

Mo3sia  and  Pannonia. 

254ValeranUS  Emperorpf  Rome. 

^F  Pope  Stephen  I. 

257  The  eighth  persecution  of  the  Christians. 
^F  Pope  Sixtus  II. 

259  The  Persians  ravage  Syria. 
— —  ^F  Pope  Dionysius. 

260  GallienUS  Emperor  of  Rome. 
——[The  Temple  of  Diana  at  Ephesus  burnt. 


Censorius,  fl. 
Modestinus,  Ictus,  fl. 

243  Ammonius,  ab.  post. 
247  Herodian,  Hist.  fl. 


Origen,od. 


258 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


223 


Yrs. 
A.C. 

'  261 


Sapor,  the  Persian,  takes  Antioch,  Tarsus,  and  Cae- 


sarea. 


267  The  Heruli  invade  and  ravage  Greece. 

268  Claudius  II.  Emperor  of  Rome. 

269  The  Goths  and  Heruli,  to  the  number  of  320,000,  de- 

feated by  Claudius. 
Pope  Felix  L 

270  Aurelian  Emperor  of  Rome. 

271  The  Alemauni  and  Marcomanni  ravage  the  empire. 

272  Th,e  ninth  persecution  of  the  Christians. 

273  Zenobia  Queen  of  Palmyra  defeated  by  Aurelian  at 

Edeffa. 

274«j[J?ope  Eutychianus. 
275 
276 

277  ProbuS  Emperor  of  Rome. 

278  Carus  Emperor    of  Rome  defeats  the  Quadi  and 

Sarmatians. 

Carinus — Numerianus,  Emperors  of  Rome. 

283  ff  Pope  Caius. 
• Fingal  King  of  Morven  died. 


Tacitus  Emperor  of  Rome. 
FlorianuS  Emperor  of  Rome. 


284 


Diocletian  Emperor  of  Rome. 


286  The  empire  attacked  by  the  northern  nations. 


290 
292 


Carausius    usurps   the 
reigns  seven  years. 


government   of  Britain,    and 


Emperors  and  two  Caesars. 
295^1  Pope  Marcellinus. 

Alexandria  in  Egypt  taken  by  Diocletian. 
300 
302 


305 


310 


31 
325 


326 
329 

336 
.33? 


The  Gregorian  and  Hermogenian  Codes  published. 
Partition  of  the  Empire  by  Dioclesian  between  two 


The  tenth  persecution  of  the  Christians. 

Pope  Marcel  1  us. 
Resignation  of  Diocletian  and  Maximiaxs 

Galerius  arid  Constantius  Emperors  of  Rome 

MaximinUS  Emperor  of  Rome. 

306  Constantine  the  Great  Emperor  of  Rome- 
stops  the  persecution  of  the  Christians. 
Pope  Eusebius. 
Pope  Melchiades. 
Pope  Sylvester. 


illustrious  Persons 


Vovatianus,  fl. 


270  Plotinus,  Phil.  ob. 


Longjnus,  ob. 

4chilles  Tatius,  Ast.  fl. 


Paulus  Samosatenus,  fi, 
276  Modestus,  fl. 
280  Manes,  Phil,  ob. 


Nemesianus,  Poet,  fl. 

•285  Arnobius,  fl. 

289  Gregory,  Hermo- 

genes,  fl. 
291   jElius  Spartianus, 

Hist.fl. 
Julius  Capitoliuus,  Hist. 
Vul  Gallicanus,  Hist.  fl. 
Trebellius  Pollio,  Hist. 

I. 
/Elius    Lampridius, 

Hist.  fl. 

Hierocles,  Poet,  fl. 
303  Fl.  VopiscuSj/ft'sf.fl. 
Steph.  Byzantinus,  Hist 

fl. 
Alciphron,  Rhet.  fl. 


Constantine  abolishes  the  combats  of  Gladiators. 


.  assembles  the  first  General  Council  at  Nice, 

where  the  doctrines  of  Arius  are  condemned. 

St.  Athanasius,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  introduces  mo- 
nachism  in  the  Roman  empire. 

Constantine  removes  the  seat  of  empire  to  Constan- 
tinople. 

^[  Pope  Marcus. 

^[  Pope  Julius  1. 

Death  of  Constantine. — The  empire  divided  among 
his  three  sons. 


311  Lactantius  fl" 
Ossian,  Poet,  fl. 


336  Arrius,  Presb.  ob. 
Stobaeus,  Philol.  fi. 
Eusebius,  Hist,  fl, 
Donatus,  fl. 


•!:>* 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Yrs. 
A.  C.\ 

337  Constantine  II.  Constans,  and  Constan- 

tlUS,   Emperors  of  Koine. 
35211  Pope  Liherius. 
356  H  Pope  Felix  I. 

35?  The  Germans  defeated  by  Julian  at  Strasburg. 
358  If  Pope  Felix  II. 

3'6l  Julian    Emperor  of  Rome — abjures   Christianity 
and  is  elected  Pontifex  Maxinms. 

attempts  fruitlessly  to  rebuild  the  temple  o 


Jerusalem. 


Jovian  Emperor  of  Rome. 

Valentinian  Emperor  of  the  West,— Valens 


363 

364 

Emperor  of  the  East. 

366  51  Pope  Daemasus. 

367  Gratiail  Emperor  of  the  West. 


Valentiman  II.  Emperor  of  the  West. 

Valens  allows  the  Goths  to  settle  in  Thrace. 

The  Goths  advance  to  the  gates  of  Constantinople. — 


376 
376 
878 

Death  of  Valens. 
379  TheodosiuS  the  Great  Emperor  of  the  East. 


Second  General  Council  held  at  Constantinople. 
The  Huns  overrun  Mesopotamia — are  defeated  by  the 

Goths. 
Symmachus  pleads  the  cause  of  Paganism  against  St. 


381 
383 

384. 

Ambrose  in  the  Senate. 
385  5  Pope  Syricus. 

391 
395 


39: 

399  1[  Pope  Anastasius. 

Gainas  the  Goth  obtains  honours  from  Arcadius. 
400 


TheodosiuS  Emperor  of  the  West  and  East. 
ArcadiuS  Emperor  of  the  East  and 

of  the  West. 
The  Huns  invade  the  eastern  provinces. 
St.  Chrysostom  chosen  Patriarch  of  Constantinople. 


Alaric  the  Goth  ravages  Italy 
Pope  Innocent  I. 


401 

403  Stilicho,   General  of    Honorius,  defeats   Alaric  neai 

Pollentia. 

404  r  ERGUS  I.  King  of  Scotland,  supposed  to  have  be- 

gun his  reign 

406  The  Vandals,  Alans,  &c,  invade  France  and  Spain. 
408  TheodosiuS  II.  Emperor  of  the  East. 

410  Rome  sacked  and  burnt  by  Alaric. — Death  of  Alaric. 

411  The  Vandals  settled  in  Spain. 

416  The  Secular  Games  celebrated  at  Rome. 

The  Pelagian  Heresy  condemned  by  the  Bishops  of 
Africa. 

417  ^  Pope  Zozimus. 

418  f  Pope  Boniface  I. 

4->0  Pharamond  first  King  of  the  Franks  supposed  to  have 

begun  his  reign 
422  ^  Pope  Caelestinus 


Illustrious  Persojrf* 


Eutropius,  Hist.  fl. 
Lihanius,  Soph.  fl. 
Julian,  Phi  1. 11. 


lamblichus,  Phil,  ob, 
Aurel.  Victor  fl. 
Ve*getius,  Hist.fl. 

371  St.  Athanasius,  ob. 

372  Eunapius,  fl. 

R.  Festus  Avienus,  fl. 
Pappus,  Math.  fl. 


379  St.  Bazil,  ob. 
38uAmmian.  Marcel.oJ. 
Prudentius,  Poet.  fl. 


389  Gregory  Naz.  ob. 
392  Ausonius,  Poet,  ob. 


397  St.  Ambrose,  ob. 
399  Hesychius,  fl. 
Claudiao,  Poet,  fl. 

Heliodorus,  Hist.  jE 
fl. 
ongus,  fl. 


07  St.  Chrysostom,  o*. 
ervius,  Com.  fl. 
)rosius,  Hist.  fl. 

1 6  Macrobius,  Pliilol. 
ob. 


20  St.  Jerome,  oft. 
Sulpitius  St'verus, 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


ss: 


Yrs. 

A.  C. 

424 


426  The  Romans  withdraw  finally  from   Britain. 


428 


431 
432 


Pope  Sixtus  III. 

435  The  Theodosian  Code  published. 
43d  Genseric  the  Vandal  invades  and  plunders  Italy. 

Eudocia  the  Empress,  wife   of  Theodosius,  retires  to 

Jerusalem. 

Carthage   taken  by  the   Vandals. — Kingdom  of  the 
Vandals  in   Africa. 
440  ^f[  Pope  Leo  the  Great. 
442  Theodosius  forced  to  make  a  disgraceful  peace  with 

Attila  the  Hun. 

Attila  causes  his  brother  Bleda  to  be  murdered. 
445  The  Britous  in  vain  solicit  the  Romans  to  assist  them 

Against  the  Picts  and  Scots. 
Attila  the  Hun    overruns  Illyrium,    Thrace,  Dacia, 

Mresia,  and  Scythia. 
448  The  Romans  engage  to  pay  a  heavy  tribute  of  gold 


449 
450 


451 


452 
455 


456 

457 


461 


46? 
468 


470 

471 

472 


473 


III.  Emperor  of  the  West. 


the 
Goths. 


Roman  General,  defeats  the  Franks  and 


The  third  General  Council  held  at  Ephesus. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


426  Zozimus,  Hist.  fl. 
30  St.  Augustine,  ob. 
)!ympiodoius,  Hist.  fl. 
r'elagius,  Her.  ob. 


to  Attila. 

Merovceus  King  of  the  Franks. 
Marcian  Emperor  of  the  East. 
Attila  ravages  Germany  and  France. 
Theodoric  King  of  the  Visigoths  killed  in  battle. 

The  Huns  defeated  by  jEtius. 
The    Saxons   arrive    in    Britain    under    Hengist   and 

Horsa. 

The  fourth  General  Council  held  at  Chalcedon. 
Foundation  of  the  city  of  Venice. 
PetrOlliuS  MaximilS  Emperor  of  the  West. 

AvituS  Emperor  of  the  West. 

Rome  taken  and  plundered  by  Genseric  the  Vandal. 

Childeric  King  of  the  Franks. 

LeO   the  Great  Emperor  of  the  East. 

MajorianUS  Emperor  of  the  West. 


Emperor  of  the  West,  raised  by  Ricimer. 
Pope  Hilarius. 

AnthemillS  Emperor  of  the  West. 

Euric  King  of  the  Visigoths  drives  the  Romans  out 
of  Spain. 

1f  Pope  Simplicity. 

yElla  the  Saxon  takes  possession  of  the  kingdom  of 
Sussex, 

,Ella  defeats  all  the  British  Princes. 

Great  eruption  of  Mount  Vesuvius,  seen   from  Con- 
stantinople. 

Olibius  Emperor  of  the  West. 


Emperor  of  the  West,  degraded   and 
stripped  by 
474  Julius  NepOS  Emperor  of  the  West. 

ZeUO  Emperor  of  the  East.  2  F 


444  St.  Cyril,  ol. 


Eutychus,  fl. 

450  Sozomen,  Hist.  oft. 


463  Victorias  of  Acquit, 

fl. 
466  Prosper,  ob. 


226 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A.  C 

475 

476 


47GHierocles,  fl. 
Q.  Calaber,  Poet,  fl. 


AllgUStulllS  Romulus  Emperor  of  the  West, 

raided  by  his  father  Orestes,  General  to  Nepos. 
Orestes  put  to  death  by  Odoacer  King  of  the  Heruli. 
Rome  taken  by  Odoacer,  now  King  of  Italy. 
EXTINCTION  OF  THE  WESTERN  EMPIRE  of  the  Ro- 
mans, 507  years   from    the    battle  of  Actium,  and 
1224  from  the  building  of  Rome. 
48 1  Clovis  King  of  the  Franks. 

Zeno  makes  'Theodoric,  the  Ostrogoth,  his  General, 

atid  creates  him  Consul. 
483  f  Pope  Felix  III. 
485  Battle  of  Soissons  gained  by  Clovis. 
488  Theodorir,  the  Ostrogoth,  entirely  defeats  Odoacer,  and 
is   acknowledged   King  of  Italy   by  the    Empero 
Zeno. 

490  The  Burgundians,  under  Gondebald,  ravage  Italy. 
Ireland,    called   the   Isle    of   Saints,   famous  for    it 

schools. 

491  AnastasillS  Emperor  of  the  East.  491  St.  Patrick,  ob. 
493  Odoacer  put  to  death  by  Theodoric.  492  Gennadius,  06. 
496  ^  Pope  Auastasius  II.  Malchus,  Soph  fl. 

Clovis  and  the  Franks  converted  to  Christianity. 

Pope  Symmachus. 
Alliance  between  Clovis  and  Theodoric  the  Great. 


497 
498  q[ 
499 
500 


501 


504 
507 


508 
510 


512 
514 


516 

517 
51H 

519 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Gondebald,  the    Burgundian,    becomes    tributary  to 

Clovis. 

The  Burgundian  laws  published  by  Gondebald. 
^abades  King  of  Persia  ravages  part  of  the  Easten 

Empire. 

The  Eastern  Empire  makes  peace  with  Cabades. 
Clovis  defeats   Alaric    the  Visigoth,   and    receives   a 

congratulatpry  embassy,  with  a  diadem,  from  Ana- 

stasius. 
Theodoric  the  Great  defeats  Clovis  in  the  battle  of 

Aries,  and  then  make's  peace  with  him. 

lovis  makes  Paris  the  capital  of  the  kingdom  of  the 

Franks. 
Death  of  Clovis. — Division  of  his  kingdom  among  hi 

four  sons. 
Childebert,  Thierry,  Clotaire,  and  Clodomir,  Kings  of 

the  Franks.  , 

The  Heruli  allowed  by  Anastasius  to  settle  in  Thrace. 

Pope  Hormisdas. 
Arthur  Kingrrf  the  Britons  supposed  to  have  begun  his 

reign. 

The  Computation  of  Time  by  the  Christian  J5ra  in- 
troduced by  Dionysius  the  Monk. 
The  Getae  ravage  lllyrium,  Macedonia,  and  Epirus. 
Justin  I.   Emperor  of  the   East,    raised  from  ob- 
scurity. 
Tustin  restores  the  Orthodox  Bishops,  and  condemns 

the  Eutychians. 
abades  King  of  Persia  proposes  that  Justin  should 

adopt  his  son  Cosroes,  and  makes  war  on  a  refusal. 


482  Sidonius  Apollina- 

ris,  ob. 
Simplicius,  Phil.  fl. 


501  Zosimus;  Hist.  ob. 
Steph.  Bczantinus, fl. 


Proclus,  Phil.fl. 


Priscian,  fl. 
rlesychius,  Hist. 6. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


227 


Yrs. 

A.C 

52 

52 


5:2 


52 


53  ( 
532 


533 


534 


535 


536^]"  Pope  Sylvester. 


53? 


538 
540 
543 
54? 
548 
549 
550 


551 
553 

555 

558 


559 


560 
562 


Pope  John  I. 
The  Arian  Bishops   deposed   by  Justin,— highly  re 

sented  by  Theodoric. 
Antioch  and  many  other  cities  almost  destroyed  by  ai 

earthquake,   but  rebuilt  by  Justin. — He  adopts  hi 

nephew  Justinian. 

Theodoric  puts  to  death  Boethiusand  Symmachus. 
f  Pope  Felix  IV. 

Justinian  I.  Emperor  of  the  East. 
Bel?sarius,  general  of  Justinian,  defeats  the  Persians. 
The  Books  of  the  Civil  law  published  by  Justinian. 
j  Pope  Boniface  II. 
Justinian   congratulates  Cosroes  on  succeeding  to  the 

throne  of  Persia,  and  concludes  a  perpetual  peace 

with  him. 

Great  insurrectiou  at    Constantinople,    quelled    witl 
jrodigious  slaughter  by  Belisarius. 
Athalaric  King  of  the  Ostrogoths  dying,  is  succeeded 

by  his  mother  Amalasonta. 
f  Pope  John  II. 
Theodobert  King  of  Metz. 

Selisarius  defeats  Gelimer  and  the  Vandals  in  Africa. 
1T  Pope  Agapetus. 


3elisarius  subdues  the  Ostrogoths  in  Italy  and   takes 

Rome. 

^[Pope  Vigilius. 

Belisarius  refuses  to  accept  the  crown  of  Italy. 
Potila,  the  Goth,  recovers  Italy  from  the  Romans. 

takes  and  plunders  Rome. 
Theodebald  King  of  Metz. 
iome  retaken  by  Belisarius. 
Commencement   of  the    kingdom  of   Poland    under 

Lechus. 

lorne  recovered  by  Totila. 

The  manufacture  of  silk  introduced  into  Europe. 
Totila  defeated   by  Narses  the  Eunuch,  and   put   to 

death. 

[  Pope  Pelagius  I. 
The  Huns,   breaking  into  Thrace,  are  defeated   by 

Belisarius. 

Selisarius  degraded,  and  ungratefully  used  by  Justi- 
nian.    . 

Clotaire  sole  King  of  France. 
"  Pope  John  III.    ' 
Belisarius  restored  to  his  honours  and  command. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Boethius,  Phil.  ob* 


29  Fulgentius,  ob. 
Yibonianus,  fl. 
Achilles  Tatius,  Hist,  fl, 


Vocopius,  Hist.  fl. 
larceilinus,  Hist.  fl. 
o.  Philo|)onus,fl. 


implicius,  Phil./. 

tobaeus,,/?. 

52  Jornandes,  Hist.  ob. 


?atibert,  Gontran,   Sigebert,  and  Childtric  Kings  of 
France. 

565  Justin  II.x  Emperor  of  the  East. 

566  Narses,  recalled  from  Italy,  invites  the  Lombards  to 

take  possession  of  the  country. 
56s] Italy  conquered  by  the  Lombards. 
5? lj  Birth  of  Mahomet  the  false  prophet. 
574  IT  Pope  Benedict  I. 

578  TiberillS  II.  p;raperor  of  the  East. 


562  Cassiodorus,  Hist. 
ob. 

565  Belisarius,  ob. 
Agathias,  Hist. Jl. 
>7oGildas,  Hist.  ob. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A.C 


58 


58 
59< 


59< 


-6o< 


60 


628 
632 

63 


638 
640 


64! 


642 


Illustrious  Persons. 
I 

Pope  PelagiusII. 
The  Latin  tongue  ceases  to  be  spoken  in  Italy  about| 

this  time. 

Maurice  Emperor  of  the  East. 
Clotaire  II.  King  ofSoissons. 
Antioch  again  destroyed,  with  30,000  inhabitants,  byJEvagrias,  Hist.fl. 

an  earthquake. 

Pope  Gregory  the  Great 


°f  1Ws> 


Augustine,  Monk, 


Thierry  II.  and  Theodobert  II.  Kings  of  Paris  am 

Austrasia. 
Augustine  the  Monk  converts  the  Saxons  to  Chris-| 

tianity. 

PllOCaS  Emperor  of  the  East  acknowledges  the  su* 

premacy  of  the  Popes. 
K  Pope  Sabinianus. 
6071J  Pope  Boniface  III. 

The  Pantheon  at  Rome  dedicated  to  God,  the  Virgin,| 

and  the  Saints. 
6081[  Pope  Boniface  IV. 

60^  The  Jews  of  Antioch  massacre  the  Christians. 
61 1  HeracliuS  Emperor  of  the  East. 

613  The  French  Maires  du  Palais  first  introduced  by  Cl< 

taire  as  Regents. 

614  Clotaire  IL  sole  King  of  France.  |Secundus,  Hist.  fl. 
Queen  Brunechilda,  accused  of  numberless  crimes,  is 

put  to  death  by  Clotaire  II. 

615  H  Pope  Deus-dedil. 

616  Jerusalem  taken  by  the  Persians  under  Cosroes  II. 

Pope  Boniface V. 
622  Era  of  the  liegyra,  or  flight  of  Mahomet  from  Mecca) 

to  Medina. 
625  U  Pope  Honor! us  I. 

The  Persians,  under  Cosroes  II.  with  the  Huns,  Abari,| 

and  Sclavonians,  besiege  Constantinople. 
Dagobert  and  Charibert  Kings  of  France. 


Mahomet,  Prophet,  ob. 


Abubeker  dies,   and   is  succeeded  by  Omar  in   the 

Caliphate. 

636  Jerusalem  taken  by  Omar  and  the  Saracens,  who  keeppG  Isidorus,  Hisp.oJ. 
possession  of  it  463  years. 


Sigebert  II.  and  Clovis  II.  Kings  of  France. 

U"  Pope  Severinus. 

"  Pope  John  IV. 

The  library  of  Alexandria,  founded  by  Ptolemy  Phi- 

ladelphus,  is  burnt  by  the  Saracens. 
/Olistantine,  Emperor   of   the   East    for   a   few  641  George  Pisides,  ob. 

months,  poisoned  by  his  stepmother. 

[eraclionas  and  Tiberius  III.  Emperors  of| 

the  East. 

Olistans,  son  of  Constantine,    Emperor  of  tl 
East. 
[  Pope  Theodorus. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


229 


A.  C. 


645  Otman  succeeds  Qma*  in  the  Caliphate. 

648  Cyprus  taken  by  the  Saracens  under  Mawia. 

649  IT  Pope  Martin  I. 


The  Saracens  take  Rhodes,  and  destroy  the  Colossus. 

Childeric  II.  King  of  Austrasia. 

1T  Pope  Eugenius  I. 

AH  Caliph  of  Arabia. — Mawia  Caliph  of  Egypt. 


653 
654 

655 

657  IT  Pope  Vitalianus. 


658  The  Saracens  obtain  peace  of  the  Emperor  Constans, 
and  agree  to  pay  a  yearly  tribute. 

668  Constantius  V.  (Pogonatus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

669  Sicily  ravaged  by  the  Saracens. 
672  IF  Pope  Adeodatus. 

The  Saracens  ineffectually  besiege  Constantinople. — 
Their  fleet  destroyed  by  the  Greek  fire  used  by 
Callinicus. 


675 


The  Saracens  attempt  to  land  in  Spain,  but  are  re- 


pulsed by  Wamba  King  of  the  Visigoths. 
676  1T  Pope  Donus. 

679  Thierry  IV.  King  of  all  France. 
1T  Pope  Agatho. 

680  The  sixth  General  or  (Ecumenical   Council  of  Con- 

stantinople. 
682  1F  Pope  Leo  II. 

684  IT  Pope  Benedict  II. 

685  IT  Pope  John  V. 

.Justinian  II.   Emperor  of  the  East. 
The  Britons,   totally  subdued  by  the  Saxons,  retrea 

into  Wales  and  Cornwall. 
6861T  PopeConon. 

Ceadwalla  King  of  Wessex  subdues  Sussex  and  Kent 
687  IT  Pope  Sergius. 
690  Pepin  Heristel,  Maire  du  Palais,  defeats  Thierry,  anc 

acquires  the  Chief  power  in  France. 
692  Clovis  III.  King  of  France. 

694  Justinian  II.  dethroned,  mutilated,  and   banished   by 

Leontius. 

695  Childebert  III.  King  of  France. 

Leontius   Emperor   of  the  East,— dethroned  and 
mutilated  by 

697Apsimar  or  Tiberius  Emperor  of  the  East. 
699  The  Saraceans  defeated  by  John  the  Patrician. 
700 

The  Saracens  again  defeated  with  great  slaughter 

Heraclius,  brother  of  Tiberius. 
701  IT  Pope  John  VI. 
704  Justinian  II.  escapes  from  prison,  defeats  Tiberius,  anc 

is  restored  to  the  throne. 

707  Justinian  II.  defeated  by  the  Bulgarians. 

708  IT  Pope  Sisinnius. 

^T  Poue  Constanti ne. 
711  PllilippicilS  BardanCS  Emperor  of  the  East. 

Dagobcrt  III.  King  of  France. 

713'AnastasiuS  II.  Emperor  of  the  East. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


[Idefonsus,  Hist.  fl. 


Paul  us   ^Eginela,   Med, 
fl. 
allinicus,Malh.fl. 


AJamnanus  Scotus, 
Hist.fl. 


830 


CRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Yrs. 
A.  C 

713  Spain  conquered  by  the  Saracens  under  Muc,a   th 

general  of  the  Caliph  Walid. 

714  IT  Pope  Gregory  II. 
TheodoSJUS  Emperor  of  the  East. 

Charles  Martel,  Maire  du  Palais,   governs  all  France 

for  twenty-six  years. 
7 1C  Childeric  II.  King  of  France. 

eO  (the  Isurian)  Emperor  of  the  East. 
7M  Omar  II.  besieges  Constantinople  without  success. 

Thierry  IV.  King  of  France. 

726  Leo  forbids  the  worship  of  images,  which  occasions  a 
great  rebellion  of  his  subjects,  the  Pope  defending 
the  practice. 

728  Leo  orders  Pope  Gregory   to  be  seized,  and  sent  to 
Constantinople;    but   the  order  is   frustrated,  and 
Leo  confiscates  the  imperial  domains   of  Sicily  and 
Calabria. 
The  Saracens  ravage  Gallia  Narbonnensis. 

Pope  Gregory  HI. 

Charles  Martel  defeats  the  Saracens  between  Tours  and 
Poictiers. 

736  Leo  persecutes  the  Monks. 

737  Death  of  Pelagius,  who  preserved  the  Christian  mo- 

narchy in  Asturia. 

740  The   duchy  of  Spoleto,  seized   by   the   Normans. — 

Recovered  by  the  Pope. 

741  ^[  Pope  Zachary. 

742  Childeric  HI.  King  of  France. 
Constailtine  (Copronymus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

Enemy  to  images  and  saint-worship, 
defeats  and  puts  to  death  Artabazdus, 


729 
731 
732 


731  IT 


743 

745 
749  Th 


752  IT 


751 

752 
753 

754 


756 


757H 
759 


735  Bede,  Hist.  ot. 


who  had  seized  Constantinople. 

destroys  the  fleet  of  the  Saracens. 

race  of  the  Abassidae    become  Caliphs  of  the 


e 
Saracens. 

Pepin  fLe  Bref)  King  of  France,  founder  of  the  se- 
cond or  Carlovingian  race. 
Pope  Stephen  III. 

Astolphus  King  of  the  Lombards  erects  the  dukedom 
of  Ravenna,  and  claims  from  the  Pope  the  dukedom 
of  Rome. 

Pope  Stephen  requests  the  assistance  of  Pepin  against 
the  Lombards. 

Pepin  invades  Italy,  and  strips  Astolphus  of  his  new 
possessions,  conferring  them  on  the  Pope  as  a  tem- 
poral sovereignty. 

Almanzor  Caliph  ofcthe  Saracens,  a  great  encourager 
of  learning. 

Desiderius  or  Didier  proclaimed  King  of  the  Lom- 
bards with  the  Pope's  consent. 

Abdalrahman  I.  takes  the  title  of  King  of  Cordova, 
and  is  the  founder  of  the  splendid  dominion  of  the 
Moors  in  Spain. 

Pope  Paul  I.  renews  the  alliance  with  Desiderius. 
Pope  Stephen  III.  quarrels  with  Desiderius. 


Illustrious  Persons* 


Wuca  the  Saracen,  ob. 


'redcgaire,  Hist.  fl. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


231 


Yrs. 

A.  C. 

762 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Alraanzor  builds  Bagdat,  and  makes  it  the  seat  of  the  760  Jo.  Damasccuus, 


empire  of  the  Caliphs. 
767  The  Turks  ravage  Asia  Minor. 
768\Charles  ft  he  Great  J  and  Carloman  Kings  of  France. 

ff  Pope  Stephen  IV. 

Constantine  dissolves  the  Monasteries  in  the  East. 
Charlemagne  sole  Monarch  of  France. 


770 

772 


774 


775 
778 


Moors  in  Spain,  where  Rolando  is  killed. 
779  Charlemagne  conquers  Navarre  and  Sardinia. 


781 


785 


786 

787 


788 
793 


797 


800 


807 
811 
813 
813 

814 
816 


makes  war  against  the  Saxons. 


Pope  Adrian  I. 
Charlemagne  defeats  Desiderius,  and   puts  an  end  to 
the  kingdom  of  the  Lombards,  which  had  subsisted 
206  years. 

LeO  IV.    Emperor  of  the  East. 

Battle   of  Roncezvalles  between   the  Christians  and 


Constantine   (Porphyrogenitus)    Emperor  of  the 

East. 
Irene,  Empress,  Regent  in  her  son's  minority,  keeps 

him  in  entire  subjection. 

she  re-establishes  the  worship  of  images. 


Charlemage  subdues  the  Saxons, 
Haroun  Alraschid  Caliph  of  the  Saracens. 

invades  and  ravages  a  part  of 


the 


empire. 


Constantine  assumes  the  government  of  the  empire, 
and  imprisons  his  mother. 

The  Danes  for  the  first  time  land  in  England. 

The  seventh  General  Council,  or  second  of  Nice,  is 
held. 

Irene  puts  to  death  her  son  Constantine,  and  is  pro- 
claimed sole  Empress. 

Irene  proposes  to  marry  Charlemagne,  which  being 
disapproved  of  by  her  subjects,  she  is  dethroned  and 
confined  to  a  monastery. 

Nicephoi'US  Emperor  of  the  East. 

794  Charlemagne  defeats  and  utterly  extirpates  the  Huns, 

795  ^[  Pope  Leo  HI. 

The  Saracens  ravage  Cappadocia,  Cyprus,  Rhodes,  &c 
Nicephorus  associates  his  son  Saturaciusin  the  empire. 

EMPIRE  OF  THE  WEST. — Charlemagne  crowned 
Emperor  at  Rome. 

Baroun  Alraschid  courts  the  alliance  of  Charlemagne. 
Michael  (Curopalates)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

(the  Armenian)  Emperor  of  the  East. 
Almamon,  Caliph  of  the  Saracens,  a  great  encourager 

of  learning. 

Lewis  fie  Debonnaire)  Emperor  and  King  of  France. 
The  eastern   empire  ravaged  by  earthquakes,  famine, 


conflagrations,  &c, 
Pope  Stephen  V. 
8 17   [ Pope  Pascal  I. 

-.ewis  (le  Deb.)  divides  the  empire  among  his  sons. 


Geo.  Syncellus,  fl. 


801  Paul  Diaconus,  ob. 
Mesue  Arab.  Med.  a. 
804  Alcuiu  Hist. ob. 


814  Charlemagne,  oft. 


232 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


Yrs. 

A.  C. 

821 


824 
127 


828 
829 
838 

840 
841 


843 

844  ^  PopeSergius  HI. 

845  The  Normans  plunder  Hamburgh,  and  penetrate  into 

Germany. 

847  IF  Pope  Leo  IV. 

848  The  Venetian  Fleet  destroyed  by  the  Saracens. 

851  ^F  Pope  Joan  supposed  to  have  filled  the  Papal  chai 

for  two  years. 
BasilillS  associated  Emperor  of  the  East. 


Illustrious  Persons,. 


Michael  (Balbusorthe  Stammerer)  Emperor   < 

the  East. 
^F  Pope  Eugene  II. 

Icgfittt  "™'tes  the  kingdoms  of  the  Saxon  Hepta: 

chy — Beginning  of  the  kingdom  of  England. 
^F  Pope  Valentine. 

Pope  Gregory  IV. 

Ernperor  of  the  East. 
King  of  England. 
The  Scots  under  Kenneth  entirely  subdue  thePicts. 
LOTHARIUS  Emperor  of  Germany. 
Charles  (the  BaldJ  King  of  France. 
Lotharius  defeated  by  his  two  brothers  in  the  battle  o 

Fontenai,  and  deposed. 
LEWIS  (of  Bavaria)  Emperor  of  Germany. 
Michael  III.  Emperor  of  the  East. 

he  Normans  plunder  the  city  of  Rouen. 


LEWIS  II.  Emperor  of  Germany 
and 


855 

857 

858  IfPope  Nicholas  I. 

866 

86/ 


Kings  of  England. 


884 
886 

—-  - 

887 


888 
890 


King  of  England. 
The  Danes  ravage  England. 
Basili  is  sole  Emperor  of  the  East. 
IFPope  Adrian  II. 
Photius,  Patriarch  of  Constantinople,  excommunicates 

Pope  Adrian. 
872  &lfrtfJ  (the  Great)  King  of  England. 

f  Pope  John  VIII. 

875  CHARLES  (the  Bald)  Emperor  of  Germany. 
877  LEWIS  (the  Stammerer)    Emperor   of  Germany   and 
King  of  France. 

879  Lewis  II L  and  Carloman  Kings  of  France. 
The  kingdom  of  Aries  begins. 

880  CHARLES    (the    Gross)    Emperor  of    Germany  '  arjd 

King  of  France. 

Ravages  of  the  Normans  in  France. 
Marinus. 


«RPope  Adrian  III. 

(the  Philosopher)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

The  University  of  Oxford  founded  by  Alfred. 

ARNOLD  Emperor  of  Germany. 

The  Normans  besiege  Paris,  which  is  gallantly  defended 
by  Bishop  Goseliu  and  Count  Eudes. 

Eudes  or  Odo  King  of  France. 

Alfred  the  Great  composes  his  Code  of  Laws,  and  di- 
vides England  into  Counties,  Hundreds  and  Ti- 
things. 


Alburaazar,  Ast.  fl. 
Bginhart,  Hist.  06. 


57  Photius  Patr.  o5. 


70  Godescalus,  ob. 
74  Ado,  Hist.  ob. 

78  Hubba,  Dane,  o5. 


82  Hincomarus,  ob. 

83  Scotas  Erigena, 
icetas,  Hist.  fl. 
Ifred,  H. 


-  e 

891 


897 
898 
900 


901 

904 
905 
911 

912 

£13 
914 
915 


920 
923 

925 

928^ 
929 
931 
930 


939 
940 

941 
943 
946 
948 
954 

955 
956 

959 
963 

"96 
965 
967 
969 
972 
973 
97 
975 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 

[[Pope  Formoses. 
IT  Pope  Stephen  VII, 
if  Pope  John  IX. 
'harles  HI.  (the  Simple}  King  of  France. 

<F  Popo  Benedict  IV. 

EWIS  IV.  Emperor  of  Germany. 
Edivard(the  Eider)  succeeds  Alfred   as  King  of 

England. 
F  Pope  Leo  V. 
f  Pope  Sergius  III. 
CONRAD  I.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

itine  IX.  Emperor  of  the  East. 
The  Normans  are    established  in   Normandy   under 

Rollo. 
1F  Pope  Ariastasius, 

Pope  Landon. 

Onstantitie  and  RomanUS   Emperors  of  the 

East. 

Pope  John  X. 
The  University  of  Cambridge  founded  by  Edwprd  the 

Elder. 

IENRY  (The  Fowler)  Emperor  of  Germany, 
Rodolph  King  of  France. 

thelstan  King  of  England, 

Pope  Leo  VI. 

Pope  Stephen  VIII, 

Pope  John  XI. 
OTHO  (the  Great)   Emperor  of  Germany, 

Pope  Leo  VII. 

Louis  IV.  (d'Outremer)  King  of  France. 
~~  Pope  Stephen  IX. 

FIowel-Dha,  King  of  Wales,  an  eminent  Lawgiver, 
Edmund  I.  King  of  England. 

Pope  Marinus  X1IJ. 

Pope  Agapet. 

Edred  King  of  England. 
Lotharius  King  of  France. 
King  of  England, 
Pope  John  XII. 

Roman  US  II.  Emperor  of  the  East, 
Edgar  King  of  England. 
1T  Pope  Leo  VllL 

NicephorUS  PhoCUS  Emperor  of  the  East, 
Otho  the  Great  conquers  Italy, 
IF  Pope  John  XIII. 

Antioch  recovered  from  the  Saracens  by  Nicephorus. 
John  ZemiSSeS   Emperor  of  the  East, 
IF  Pope  Benedict  VI. 
OTHO  II.  Emperor  of  Germany. 
IF  Pope  Boniface  VII. 
IF  Pope  Benedict  VII. 

BasiliuS  and  Constantine  X.  Emperors  of  the 
East.  <&  G 


S.3S 


Illustrious  Persons. 


Azophij  Ar.  Ast./, 


942  Eudes  deCluni  G&. 


Alfarabius,  Ar.  Ast 


970  Luitp  rand,  Hist, 


234 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A.  C 

97* 

979 
983 
9Q4 
986 


Edward  II.  King  of  England. 

Ethelred   II.  King  of  Egland. 

OTHO  III.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

H  Pope  John  XIV. 

IT  Pope  John  XV. 

Lewis  V.  fie  Faineant)  King  of  France. 

Hugh,  Capet,  King  of  France,  founder  of  the  third  ra^ 

of  the  French  Kings. 
The   Arabic    numeral   cyphers    first  introduced  int 

Europe. 
Robert  (the  Wise)  King  of  France. 


987 
991 

996 

Pope  Gregory  V. 
999  1[  Pope  Sylvester  II. 
1000 

1002  HENRY  II.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

Great  massacre  of  the  Danes   by  Ethelred  King  o 
England. 

1003  IT  Pope  John  XVI. 
IT  Pope  John  XVII. 

1004  1i  Pope  John  XVIII. 

1005  Churches  first  built  in  the  Gothic  stile. 
1009  IF  Pope  Sergius  IV. 

1QI2J1I  Pope  Benedict  VIII. 
1013  The  Danes,  under  Sueno,  get  possession  of  England 
1015  The  Manichean  doctrines  prevalent  in  France  an 
^Italy. 

1016 


101 


Edmund  (Ironside)  King  of  England. 
Six  battles  fought  with   the  Danes  under  Canute  in 
England. 

Canute  the  Dane  (the  Great)  King  of  England. 


1018  The  Normans  invade  Italy. 
1024  f  Pope  John  XIX.  or  XX. 

CONRAD  II.  (the  Salic)  Emperor  of  Germany. 
20J5  Musical  characters  invented  by  Guido  Aretino. 
1028  RomanUS  ArgyrUS  Emperor  of  the  East. 

Henry  I.  King  of  France. 
1033.H  Pope  Benedict  IX. 
1034!Michael  IV.  Emperor  of  the  East. 
103i)  Harold    (Harefoot)  King  of  England. 
1039;HENRY  III.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

Canute  II-  or  Hardicenute  King  of  Eng 

land. 
Macbeth  usurps  the  throne  of  Scotland  by  the  murder 


1040 


of  Duncan. 


1041  Edward       (the    Confessor)     King    of     England 

restores  the  Sa*on  line. 
Michael  (Calaphale*)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

1042  Co n-Stan tine  (Monomachus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 
3043  The  Turks,  under  Tangrolipix,  subdue  Persia. 
1045H  Pope  Gregory  VI. 

Pope  Clement  II. 

1048  5[  Pope  Damasus  II. 

JQ49  If  Pope  Leo  IX.  the  first  Pope  who  maintained  a  re- 
gular army. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


1008  Araotn,  Hist.  05. 
oioHhazes,Ar.  Phil, 
oi. 


G  u  klo  Arct  ino,  Monk,vtf . 


50  Aviceon«j  Arab, 

Pbys.  ob. 


A.  C. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 

J054JTheodora  empress  of  the  East. 

Pope  Leo  IX.  taken  prisoner  by  the  Normans. 

1 055  f  Pope  Victor  II. 

The  Turks  take  Bagdat,  and  overturn  the  empire  of  the 
the  Caliphs. 

1056  HENRY  IV.  emperor  of  Germany. 

Malcolm  III.  (Canmore)  King  of  Scotland. 

Isaac  (Couimenus)  emperor  of  the  East. 

Pope  Stephen  X. 
1058  f  Pope  Nicholas  II. 

The  Saracens  driven  out  of  Sicily  by  Robert  Guiscard 

the  Norman. 


S35 


1057 


1051 
1060 
1061 
10& 


1079 
1081 

1084 
1086 
1087 

1093 


1095 


1098 


Constantine  XII.  (Ducas)  emperor  of  the  East. 


of  France. 


Philip  I. 

Pope  Alexander  II. 
The  Turks  take  Jerusalem  from  the  Saracens. 


1060  Harold  If.  King  of  England  reigned  nine  months. 
1006  William   (the  Conqueror)  King  of  England. 
1068  RomailUS  Diogenes  emperor  of  the  East. 

Edgar  Atheling  seeks  refuge  in  Scotland. 

Margaret  sister  of  Edgar  Atheling,  married  to  Malcolm 
King  of  Scotland. 

1070  The  feudal  law  introduced  into  England. 

1071  Michael  Ducas  emperor  of  the  East 
1073  1F  Pope  Gregory  VII. 

1076  The  emperor  Henry  IV.  excommunicated  and  deposed 

by  the  Po4«e. 
1078  NicepfoorilS  (Boton)  emperor  of  the  East. 

Ooomsday-book  begun  by  William  the  Conqueror. 
Alexis  I.   (Comnenus)   empesor  of  the  East. 
:ienry  IV.  emperor  besieges  Rome. 
—  recrowned  emperor  of  Germany. 
Pope  Victor  III. 
Pope  Urban  II. 

^illiam  II.  (Rufus)  King  of  England. 
St  Margaret  Queen  of  Scotland  died. 

'ONALD  Bane  King  of  Scotland  died. 

DUNCAN  II.  King  of  Scotland. 

The  first  Crusade  to  the  Holy  Land.— Peter  the  Hermit. 
The  Crusaders  take  Antioch. 

JtirfDGARKing  of  Scotland. 
1099  Jerusalem    taken    by   Godfrey    of  Boulogne.— The 

Knights  of  St.  John  instituted. 
f  Pope  Pascal  IL 

Henry  I.  (Beauclerc)  King  of  England. 
Guiscard  of    Normandy  takes  the   title  of  King  of 

Naples 

Baldwin'King  of  Jerusalem  takes  Ptolemais. 
HEN  BY  V,  Emperor  of  Germany. 


Illustrious  Persons. 


S  uidas, 


1100 


1102 


1104 
1106 


Will,  of  Spires,  Mat./. 


108S  Beringer,  Poet  oC 


1089  Abp.  katifranc,  ob- 


) or,  Raymond  Count  <U 
T boalo>use>  »&, 


236 
A-  C. 

110? 
1108 
1118 


J119 


1124 


1130 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLtf. 


ALEXANDER  I.  King  of  Scotland. 

Lewis  VL  fie  QrosJ  King  of  France. 

fl  Pope  Gelasius  II. 

The  order  of  Knights  Templars  instituted. 

•Jolm  (Comnenus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

IF  Pope  Calixtus  II. 

"AVID  I.  King  of  Scotland. 

H  Pope  Honorius  II. 

LOTHARIUS  IL  Emperor  of  Germany. 

^  Pope  Innocent  II. 


135  Stephen  King  of  England. 

10^  r    •   rrrr   ti   r       i   m  „ 


1139 

1140 
1141 


1143 


1144 
3145 
1147 


1151 


J153 


1137  Lewis  VII.  fie  JeuneJ  King  of  France,— married  to 

Eleanor  of  Guienne. 
The  Pandects  of  the  Roman  law  discovered  at  Amalphi. 

1 138  CONRAD  III.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

The  Scots,  under  David  I.  defeated  by  the  English  in 
the  battle  of  the  Standard. 


Alphonsol.   King  of  Portugal  rescues  that  kingdom 

from  the  Saracens. 

The  Canon  Law  first  introduced  into  England. 
Stephen  king  of  England  taken  prisoner  rn  the  battle 

of  Lincoln  by  the  troops  of  Matilda. 

•  recovers  his  kingdom. 

1F  PopeCrelestinuslI. 

aiTuel  (Comnenus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

Pope  Lucius  II. 

Pope  Eugene  III. 
The  second  Crusade  excited  by  St.  Bernard. 


1 150  The  study  of  the  Civil  Law  revived  at  Bologna 


Illustriout  Persons. 


1113  Sipebert,  Hist.  ob. 
Anna  Comnena,  Hist,  fl. 


Vill.  of  M almsbury, 
Hist.  ft. 


143  Peter  Abelard,  o* 

•irj.  ,r. 
x-  \  •     rr 


The  Canon  Law  is  collected  by  Gratjan,  a  Monk  o1 

Bologna. 
FREDERICK  I.  (Barbarossa)  Emperor  of  Germany. 


Geoff,  of  Monraoiitb,/^ 


M 


ALCotM  IV.  Kiog  of  Scotland. 


Pope  Ana«tasiuslV. 

Treaty  of  Winchester — Compromise   between   King 
Stephen  and  Prince  Henry. 
cnryll.  (Plantagenet)  King  of  England 
J154H  Pope  A< Irian  IV. 

The  parties  of  the  Guelphs  and  Ghibellin-es  disturb 


1160 


1165 

1171 
1172 
1180 


Italy. 

The  Bank  of  Venict  instituted. 
Interview   between    Henry  11.    and    Malcolm  IV.  at 


1157 
1158 

Carlisle. 
1159  H  Pope  Alexander  HI. 


The  Albigenses  maintain  heretical  doctrines, 
institution  of  the  order  of  Teutonic  Knights  in  Ger- 
many. 
T.  Becket  condemned  by  the  Council  of  Glare »d oft. 

w 

ILLIAM  (the  Lion)  King  of  Scotland. 
Becket  murdered  at  Canterbury, 
onquest  of  Ireland  by  Henry  II. 
°          Augustus  King  of  France* 


Custathius    Com.    OS 
Horn./. 


Peter  Lombard,  ob. 


Hen.  of  Huutingilon,  fi 


Ran.  de  G!anvillf,./f. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 

A .  C . 

1180  AleXlUS  II.  (Comnenus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 

1181  ^  Pope  Lucius  III. 

1183  AndronicUS  (Comnenus)  Emperor  of  the  East. 
1 1 85  1F  Pope  Urban  III. 

Isaac  Angelas  Emperor  of  the  East. 

118?  IF  Pope  Gregory  VIII. 
....  I  he  city  of  Jeruselein  taken  by  Saladin. 
1 138  1F  Pope  Clement  III. 

2189  Richard  l.(Co£ur  de  Lion)  King  of  England. 
...  *  The  third  Crusade  under  Richard  1.  and   Philip  Au 
gnstus. 

1190  HENRY  VI.  emperor  of  Germany. 

1191  11  Pope  Crelestinus  III. 

1192  Richard  I.  defeats  Saladin  in  the  battle  of  Ascalon. 
....  Guy  of  Lusignan  King  of  Jerusalem. 

1195  Alexius  AngeluS  (the  Tyrant)  emperor  of  th 

East. 
]  198  PHILIP  emperor  of  Germany. 

IT  Pope  Innocent  III. 

John  King  of  England, 

The  fourth  Crusade  sets  out  frnm  Venice. 
Constantinople  taken  by  the  French  and  Venetians. 

AlexillS  and  Murbzuplllus   Emperors  of  the 
East. 

Baldwin   I.     Emperor     of    Constantinople,    and 
Theodore  I.   (Lascaris)  emperor  of  Nicaea. 

The  Inquisition  established  by  Pope  Innocent  III. 

Henry   emperor  of  Constantinople. 

OTHO  IV.  emperor  of  Germany. 

London  incorporated,  obtains  a  charter  for  electing  it:? 
Mayor  and  Magistrates. 

the    Albigenses,    under  Simon  de 


1199 
1200 
1202 


1203 


1204 


1206 
1208 


1210 


1212 


rusade    aganst 
Mountfort. 
'REDERICK  II.  emperor  of  Germany. 

LEXANDER  II.  King  of  Scotland. 
Magna  Charta,  signed  by  King  John. 


1214 

1215 

12l(j  Henri/  III.  King  of  England. 

Peter  and  John  Ducas  emperors  of  the  East 
1219  Robert  emperor  of  the  East. 

>amietta  taken  by  the  Crusaders, 
1 223  Lewis  VIII.  King  of  France. 
1226  f"  PopeHonorius  III. 

St  Lewis  X/.  Kin%  of  France. 
122?  1F  pope  Gregory  IX. 

Gengiskan  and  the  Tartars  overrun  the  empire  of  the 

Saracens. 

Baldwin  II.  French  emperor  of  Constantinople. 
The  Inquisition  committed  to  the  Dominican  Monks. 


1228 
1234 
123? 
1241 
1243 
1248 


Illustrious  Persons. 


John  of  Salisbury,  o*. 


Vill.  of  Newburgh,j7. 


R.  of  Hoveden,  Hist.jt, 


eter  of  Blois,  Hist.J. 
erv.  of  Canterbury,  J?. 
axo  Grammaticus,  06, 


Russia  brought  under  subjection  by  the,  Tartars. 

Pope  Caelestinus  IV.  :.' 

Pope  Innocent  IV. 
The  fifth  Crusade  under  St.  Lewis. 


1224    Raymond  Co  net 
de  Tboulottse,  ob. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A.  C 
1249 


1281 


1-28G 

1288 
1290 


1291 
1292 


•LEXANDER  III.  King  of  Scotland. 


1251  CONRAD  IV.  emperor  of  Germany. 

1254  IF  Pope   Alexander  IV. 

Interregnum  in  the  empire  of  Germany,  from  the 
death  of  Conrad  IV.  1254,  in  the  election  of  Ro- 
dolph  in  127,9. 

1255  Theodore  II.  (Lascaris)  emperor  of  Nicsea. 

1258  Bagdat  taken  by  the  Tartars. — End  of  the  empire  of 

the  Saracens. 

1259  John  (Lascaris)  Emperor  of  Nicaea. 

1260  Michael  (Paloeologus)  Emperor  of  Nicaea. 
— — The  Flagellants  preach  baptism  by  blood. 

1261  1T  Pope  Urban  IV. 

The  Greek  Emperors  recover  Constantinople  from  the 

French. 
1263  The  Norwegians  invade  Scotland,  and  are  defeated  by 

Alexander  III.  in  the  battle  of  Largs. 
126411  Pope  Clement  IV. 

The  Deputies  of  Boroughs  first  su.  <moned  to  Parlia- 
ment in  England. 
HLenry.  III.  of  England  taken   prisoner  in  the  battle  of 

Lewes. 

1265  Charles  Count  of  Anjou  King  of  Sicily. 
1270  Philip  III.   (the  BoldJ  King  of  France. 


Pope  Gregory  X. 

Edward  (Longshanks)  King  of  England. 
KODOLPH  (of  Hapsburg)  Emperor  of  Germany,  first 


1271 

1272 
1273 

of  the  Austrian  family. 
1276U"  Pope  Innocent  V. 

Pope  Adrian  V. 
1[  Pope  John  XXI. 
1877  H    Pope  Nicholas  III. 


If  Pope  Martin  IV. 


AndronicUS  I.    (Palaeologus)    Emperor  of    the 


1282  The  Sicilian  Vespers,  when  8000  French  were  mas- 
sacred. 

1289 

East. 

The  conquest  of  Wales  by  Edward  I. 
1285  1[  Pope  Honorius  IV. 

Philip  IV,  (the  Fair}  King  of  France. 


if 
-*AR«URET  (of  Norway)  Queen  of  Scotland. 

H  Pope  Nicholas  IV. 

Interregnum  in  Scotland  for  two  years,— Competition 

between  Bruce  and  Baliol  for  the  Crown,  decided  bv 

Edward  1. 
Ptolemais  taken  by  the  Turks — End  of  the  Crusades. 


OIIN  BALIOL  King  of  Scotland. 
ADOLPHUS  (of  Nassau)  emperor  of  Germany. 
UPopeCaelestinus  V. 

1293  From  this  year  there  is  a  regular  succession  of  Eng- 

lish Parliaments. 

1294  «[  Pope  Boniface  VIII. 

1295  Michael  AndronicUS  emperor  of  the  East.     » 


Illustrious  Persott. 


1259  Mat.  Paris,  Hist, 
ob. 


1 2?4  StT.  Aquinas,  ob. 


1280   Albertus    Mag. 
Phil.  ob. 


1284  Roger  Bacon, 
Phil.  ob. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A.  C. 
1290 


1298 


1300 
130 


1302 


1304 


1333 
1334 
1340 


1341 


1342 
13,46 


Interregnum  in  Scotland  for  eight  years. — Sir  William 
Wallace  nobly  supports  the  liberty  of  his  country 
defeats  the  English  at  Stirling,  and  drives  them  ou 
of  the  kingdom. 

Wallace   chosen    Regent   of  Scotland, — defeated   at 


Falkirk. 

ALBERT  1.  (of  Austria)  emperor  of  Germany. 
The  present  Turkish  empire  begins   under  Ottoman 

in  Bithynia. 

Quarrel  between  Philip  the  Fair  and  Pope  Boni- 
face VIII. 

Corny  n  and  Fraser  defeat  the  English  thrice  in  one  day 

The  Mariner's  Compass  said  to  be  discovered  at 
Naples. 

Wallace  betrayed,  delivered  up,  and  put  to  death  by 
Ed  ward  I. 

1306  AVoBERT  I.  (Bruce)  King  of  Scotland. 

1307  The  establishment  of  the  Swiss  Republics. 
Edward  II.  King  of  England. 

1308  HENRY  VII.  emperor  of  Germany. 
H"  Pope  Clement  V 

The  seat  of  the  Popes  transferred  to  Avignon  for  se- 
venty years 

13 10  Rhodes  taken  by  the  Knights  of  St.  John  of  Jeru- 

salem. 

1311  Pierce  Gaveston,  favourite  of  Edward  II.  put  to  death. 

1312  The  Knights  Templars  suppressed  by  Philip  the  Fair. 
1314  The  Scots  under  Robert  Bruce  defeat  the  English  un- 
der Edward  II.  at  Bannockburn. 

L.EWIS  V.  (of  Bavaria)  emperor  of  Germany. 

13 14  Lewis  X.  (HutinJ  King  of  France. 

13 15  John  King  of  France. 
13l6f  Pope  John  XXII. 

Philip  V.  (the  long}  King  of  France. 
1320 
1321 
1327 
1328 

1329 

1331 
1332 


Fob.  Duns  Scotus,  ob. 


II.  (Palseologus)  emperor  of  the  East. 
Charles,  IV.  (the  Fair )  King  of  France. 
EdlVCird  III.  King  of  England.   . 
Philip  VI.  (of  ValoisJ  King  of  France. 


•Randolph   Earl  of 


L?AVID  II.  King  of  Scotland.- 

Murray  Regent. 

The  Teutonic  Kuights  settle  in  Prussia, 
idward  Baliol,  assisted  by  Edward  III.  is  crowned  at 

Scone  King  of  Scots,  but  is  soon  driven  out  of  the 

kingdom, 
lasimir  III.  (the  Great)  King  of  Poland. 

Pope  Benedict  XII. 

jiinpowder  invented  by  Swartzva  monk  of  Cologne. 
Oil  painting  invented  by  John  Van  Eyk. 

Foil!!  V.  (Palaeologus)  emperor  of  the  ^East. 
ohu  Cantacuzenos,  his  governor,  usurps  the  throne 
f  Pope  Clement  VI. 

Jattle  of  Cressy,  won  }>y  Edward  III.  and  the  Black 
Prince,  over  the  French, 


239 

Illustrious  Persons. 


Cimabue,  Paint,  oi. 


1315  Guy  Earl  of  War- 
wick, ob. 
Raym.  Lulli,  Phil.  ob. 


Dante  Aligbieri,  Po.  ob. 
astruc.  Castracani,  ob. 


330  Mortimer  Earl  of 

March,  ci. 


840 

c. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 


A        /7    | 

1346  Battle  of  Durham,  in  which  David  II.  of  Scotland  is 

taken  prisoner. 

1347  CHARLES  IV.  emperor  of  Germany. 

Colo  Ricnzi  assumes  the  government  of  Rome. 

1350  The  Order  of  the  Garter  instituted  by  Edward  III. 
Peter  (the  Cruel)  King  of  Castile. 

1351  John  II.  King  of  France. 

1352  f  Pope  Innocent  VI. 

The  Turks  first  enter  Europe. 

1356  The,  battle  of  Poictiers,   in  which  John  II.  King  of 
France  is  taken  prisoner,  and  afterwards  brought  to 
London. 
1362  f  Pope  Urban  V. 

The  law-pleadings  in  England  changed  from  French 
to  English. 


1364 
)3/0 


1378 


1380 


1311 


Charles  V.  King  of  France. 
f  Pope  Gregory  XF. 

R, 


'OBERT  II.  King  of  Scotland. 
1377  The  Pope's  return  from  Avignon  to  Rome* 
Richard  II.  King  of  England, 
Wickliffe's  doctrines  propagated  in  England. 


The  schism  of  the  double  Popes  at  Rome  and  Avignon 
begins,  and  continues  thirty-eight  years. 

f  Pope  Urban  VI.  Rome. 

Pope  Clement  VII  Avignon. 

WENCESLAUS,  Emperor  of  Germany,  deposed  in 
1400. 

Charles  VI.  King  of  France. 

Tamerlane  invades  and  subdues  Chorassar. 


13  s3 


1384 


Wat   Tyler's   and  Jack  Straw's  insurrection  in   Engr 

land. 

Peace  between  Venice  and  Genoa. 
Bills  of  exchange  first  used  in  England, 
"annon  first  used  by  the  English   in  the  defence  of 

Calais* 
Philip  the  Bold,  Duke  of  Burgundy,  succeeds  to  the 


earldom  of  Flanders. 
1386  Tamerlane  subdues  Georgia. 


1368 


1392 
1394 

1395 
1398 

1399 
1400 
1402 


Illustrious    Persona, 


1363  Edwar  Raliol,  ob. 


1374  F.  Petrarch,Po.  ob. 
1376  G.  Roccace,  Po.o6. 
—  Ed.  Black  Pr.  ob. 


Mat.  of  Wcsim.Hist.ob. 
—Bert,  du  Guesclin,  06. 


Battl.e  of    Otterbum    between  Percy   (Hotspur)  and 
Douglas. 
Pope  Boniface  IX. 

1390  ROBERT  III.  Ksng  of  Scotland. 

1391  Manuel  II.  (Palaeologus)  emperor  of  the  East. 


The  Cape  of  Good  Hope  discovered  by  the  Portu- 
guese. 

The  Jews  banished  from  France  by  Charles  VI. 
^Pope  Benedict  XIII. 

Sigi«mijnd  King  of  Hungary  defeated  by  Bajazet  I. 
Tamerlane  subdues  partot'Hindobtan  and  takes  Delhy. 
Henry  IV.  King  of  England. 

Bajazet  is  taken  prisoner  by  Tamerlane  in  the  battle 
of  Angoria. 

Battle  of  Halidown  Hill,  in  which  the  Scots  are  de- 
feated. 


1383  Abulfeda,  Sar.  06. 
1385  Wickliffe,  e»i. 


Froissart,  Hist.  ob. 
Sir  John  Gower,  Poet, 

ob. 
1400  Geoff.  Chaucer, 

Poetic*. 


- 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE. 

Battle  of  Shrewsbury,  in  which  Hotspur  is  killed. 
IfPope  Innocent  VII. 


A.  C. 

1403 

1404  .       . 

1405  Death  of  Tamerlane. 


1406 


1408 


tl  AMES  I.  King  of  Scotland* 

IJPope  Gregory  XII. 

Council  of  Pisa,  where  Pope  Gregory  is  deposed. 

1[Pope  Alexander  V. 


1425 

1428 


1231 


1236 


1437 
1438 
1439 


1440 


1444 


1445 
1446 
144' 


1453 


1410JOSSE  (Marquis  of  Brandenburgh)  emperof  of  Ger- 
many 

Pope  John  XXITT. 
1411  SIGISMUND  emperor  of  Germany 

The  University  of  St.  Andrew's  in  Scotland  founded. 

1413  jS|£ttVJ}  V-  King  of  England. 

1414  Council  of  Constance,  in  which  two  Popes  were  depo- 

sed,  and  the  Popedom  remained  vacant  near   three 
years. 

1415  Henry  V.  defeats  the  French  at  Agincourt. 

John  Huss  condemned  by  the  Council  of  Constance 
for  heresy,  and  burnt. 

1416  Jerome  of  Prague  condemned  by  the  same  Council, 

and  burnt. 
141?  UPope  Martin  V. 

Paper  first  made  from  linen  rags. 
1420  The  islandof  Madeira  discovered  by  the  Portuguese. 

1421 
1422 


(Palaeologus)  emperor  of  the  east. 


Amurath  besieges  Constantinople. 
jfytnVg  VI.  King  of  England. 
Charles  VII.  King  of  France. 


James  I.  King  of 
English. 


Jcots  liberated  from  captivity  by  the 


The  Court  of  Session  in  Scotland  instituted  by  James  I. 
Joan  of  Arc,  the  Maid  of  Orleans,  compels  the  Eng- 
lish to  raise  the  siege  of  that  town. 
Eugene  IV. 


Rise  of  the  Medici  family  at  Florence. 

Paris  recovered  by  the  French  from  the  English. 

J  AMES  II.  King  of  Scotland. 

ALBERT  II.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

Reunion  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  churches. 

The  Pragmatic  Sanction  established  in  France. 

FREDERICK  III.  Emperor  of  Germany. 

Invention  of  the  art  of  Printing  by  John  Guttenberg 

at  Strasburg. 
Ladislaus  King  of  Hungary  killed  in  battle  with  the 

Turks. 

Constantine  (Palaeologus)  emperor  of  the  East. 
Great  inundation  of  the  sea  in  Holland. 
f  Pope  Nicholas  V. 
Rise  of  the  Storza  family  at  Milan. 
Constantinople  taken    by  the  Turks.—  EXTINCTION 

OF  THE  EASTERN  EMPIRE  of  the  ROMANS. 


241 

Illustrious  Persons. 


1408  Owen  Glendour, 
ob. 

1409  Nicb.  FlaraeljAlcb 
ob. 


1415  Em.  Chrysoloras, 

ob. 


Alain  Chartier,  Poet,o& 


1422  T.  Walsingham, 

Hist.ob. 

1424  Earl  of  Buchan, 
Const,  of  France,  ob. 

Monstrelet,  Hist .  ft. 
Joan  <T Arc,  ob. 


Scanderberg,  jff. 


1443  L.  Aretin,  ob. 


1447  Humph.  D.  of 
Gloucester,  ob. 


W,  Green  and  T,  Chaplin,  Printers,  j,  Crane-Court,  Fleet-Street. 


THE 

HISTORY 

.OP 

AMMIANUS   MARCELLINUS. 


NOW  JFJRST  TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH, 

FOR     THE     USE     OF     THE     ARMY. 


WITH 


A    PRELIMINARY    DISCOURSE 


IN   WHICH   ARE  CONTAINED 


THE   FOUR  BOOKS 


OF 


JUSTINIAN'S  INSTITUTES 

©f  tiyt  &oman  flafo. 


Printed  by    W.  Green   and  T.   Chaplin,  1,  Crane-Court,  Fleet-Slreet, 

ton.    J.     DAVIS      MILITARY   CHRONICLE     AND   MILITARY   CLASSICS   OFflCS, 

38,ESSEX.STREET,  STRAND,  AND   TO    BE    HAD    OF    ALL   THE 

BOOKSELLERS,— 1814. 


ADVERTISEMENT 
TO  THE  STUDIOUS    READER. 


AS  it  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  have  a  clear 
understanding  of  the  Roman  or  Byzantine  Histo- 
rians without  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  LAWS 
by  which  the  Roman  empire  ivas  governed,  it  is 
deemed  pertinent  to  accompany  this  part  of  our 
subject  by  the  INSTITUTES  of  Justinian.  It  may  be 
unnecessary  to  add,  that  these  Institutes  are  a  clas- 
sification, under  certain  Tables  and  Chapters,  of 
the  whole  body  of  the  Ronan  laws,  of  those  laws  by 
which  the  Roman  empire  was  governed  from  the 
Punic  War  to  Augustus,  and  thence  to  Const  an- 
tine,  and  from  Constantine  downwards.  The 
reader,  therefore,  will  derive  a  threefold  advan- 
tage from  an  attentive  study  of  them,  as  first,  he 
will  become  acquainted  with  those  principles,  and 
that  system,  by  which  the  world  ivas  governed  for 
so  many  centuries  ;  secondly,  he  will  be  enabled  to 
understand  the  frequent  allusions  of  the  Historians 
and  Poets  to  the  terms,  rules,  and  practices  of 
their  own  laws  ;  and  thirdly,  he  will  trace  to  the 
fountain-head  the  modern  laws  of  all  the  nations 
in  Europe.  It  is  needless  to  insist  on  the  utility 
of  thus  ascending  to  the  source  of  law  and  juris- 
prudence. The  reader  will  obtain  more  accurate 
learning  by  an  attentive  study  of  these  short  INSTI- 
TUTES than  by  a  year  devoted  to  Vinius  and  the 
other  innumerable  commentators. 


THE  FOUR  BOOKS 


OF 


JUSTINIAN'S  INSTITUTES. 


TRANSLATED   INTO    ENGLISH 


By  Dr.  HARRIS. 


A 
BRIEF  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  RISE  AND  PROGRESS 

OF 

THE    ROMAN    LAW. 


THE  Roman  state  was  at  first  governed  solely  by  the  authority 
of  Romulus;   but,  when  the  people  were  increased,  he  divided 
them  into  thirty  Curios,  which  he  constantly  assembled  for  the 
confirmation  of  his  laws:  and  this  practice  of  consulting  the  peo- 
ple was  afterwards  followed  by  the  Roman  Kings,  all  whose  laws 
were  collected  by  Sextus  Papirius,  and  called  jus  Papirianum, 
from  the  name  of  their  compiler.      But,  after  the  expulsion  of 
Tarquin  and  the  establishment  of  the  republic,  the  greatest  part 
of  those  Regal  laws  soon  became  obsolete;  and  those,  which  still 
remained  in  force,  related  chiefly  to  the  priesthood.     It  thus  hap- 
pened, that  the  Romans  for  many  years  laboured  under  great 
uncertainty  in  respect  to  law  in  general;  for,  from  the  commence* 
ment  of  the  consular  state  to  the  time  of  establishing  the  Twelve 
Tables,  they  were  not  governed  by  any  regular  system.     But  at 
length,  the  people  growing  uneasy  at  the  arbitrary  power  of  their 
magistrates,  it  was  resolved,  after  much  opposition  from  the  pa- 
tricians, that  some  certain  rule  of  government  should  be  fixed 
upon:  and,  to  effect  this  purpose,  a  decemvirate  was  first  appoint- 
ed, composed  solely  of  senators,  who,  partly  from  the  laws  of 
Greece  and  partly  from  their  own  laws  still  subsisting,  framed 
ten  tables,  which,  in  the  year  of  Rome  303,  were  submitted  to  the 
inspection  of  the  people,  and  highly  approved  of.     These  how- 
ever were  still  thought  to  be  deficient;  and  therefore  in  the  year 
following,  when   a  new  decemvirate  was  appointed,  which  con- 
sisted of  seven  patricians  and  three  plebeians,  they  added  two 
tables  to  the  former  ten:  and  now  the  whole  was  regarded  but  as 
one  body  of  law,  and  entitled,  by  way  of  eminence,  the  twelve 
tables.      But,    although    these  new  collected  laws    were    most 
deservedly  in  the   highest   esteem,  yet  their  number  was  soon 
found  insufficient  to  extend  to  all  matters  of  controversy,  their 
conciseness  was  often  the  occasion  of  obscurity,  and    their  ex- 
traordinary  severity   called    aloud  for  mitigation.     It  therefore 
became  a  consequence,  that  the  twelve  tables  continually  re- 
ceived some  explanation,  addition,  or  alteration,  by  virtue  of  a 
new  law,  a  senatorial  decree,  or  a  plebiscite.     And  here  it  will  be 
proper  to  observe,  how  they  differ:  a  plebiscite  was  an  ordinance 
of   the  plebians  or  commonalty,  which  had  the  force  of  a  Ia\v3 


A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT,  &c. 


•without  the  authority  of  the  senate;  and  a  senatus-consultum,  or 
senatorial  decree,  was  an  order  made  by  the  senators  assembled 
for  that  purpose;  but  to  constitute  a  law,  properly  so  called  it 
was  necessary,  that  it  should  first  be  proposed  by  some  magistrate 
of  the  senate,  and  afterwards  be  confirmed  by  the  people  in  general. 
Recourse  was  also  had  to  the  interpretation  and  decisions  of  the 
learned,  which  were  so  universally  approved  of,  that,  although 
they  were  unwritten,  they  became  a  new  species  of  law,  and  were 
called  auctoritas  prudentum  andjw.9  civile.  It  must  be  here  ob- 
served, that,  soon  after  the  establishment  of  the  twelve  tables,  the 
learned  of  that  time  composed  certain  solemn  forms,  called  actions 
of  law,  by  which  the  process  of  all  courts  and  several  other  acts, 
as  adoption,  emancipation,  &c.  were  regulated.  These  forms  were 
for  above  a  century  kept  secret  from  the  public,  being  in  the 
hands  only  of  the  priests  and  magistrates;  but  about  the  year  U. 
C.  448  they  were  collected  and  published  by  oneFlavius,  a  scribe; 
and,  from  him,  called  the  Flavian  law;  for  which  acceptable 
present  the  people  in  general  shewed  many  instances  of  their 
gratitude.  But,  as  this  collection  was  soon  found  to  be  defective 
another  was  afterwards  published  by  Sextus  Mlius,  who  made  a 
large  addition  of  many  new  forms,  which  passed  under  the  title 
of  jus  jElianum,  from  the  name  of  the  compiler. 

In  process  of  time  there  also  arose  another  species  of  law,  called 
the  praetorian  edicts:  which,  although  they  ordinarily  expired  with 
the  annual  office  of  the  praetor,  who  enacted  them,  and  extended 
no  farther  than  his  jurisdiction,  were  yet  of  great  force  and  autho- 
rity ;  and  many  of  them  were  so  truly  valuable  for  their  justice 
and  equity,  that  they  have  been  perpetuated  as  laws. 

These  were  the  several  principal  parts  of  the  Roman  law,  during 
the  free  state  of  the  commonwealth;  but,  after  the  re-establish- 
ment of  monarchy  in  the  person  of  Augustus,  the  law  received 
two  additional  parts;  the  imperial  constitutions  and  the  answers 
of  the  lawyers. 

The  constitutions  soon  became  numerous,  but  were  not  framed 
into  a  body  till  the  reign  of  Constantine  the  great  ;  when  Grego- 
rius  and  Hermogenes,  both  lawyers  of  eminence,  collected  in  two 
codes  the  constitutions  of  the  pagan  emperors,  from  the  reign  of 
Adrian  to  that  of  Dioclesian  inclusive:  but  these  collections  were 
not  made  by  virtue  of  any  public  authority,  and  are  not  now 
extant. 

Another  code  was  afterwards  published  by  order  of  the  empe- 
ror Theodosius  the  younger,  which  contained  the  constitutions  of 
all  the  Christian  Emperors,  down  to  his  own  time;  and  this  was 
generally  received  both  in  the  eastern  and  western  empires. 


A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT,  &c.  xi 

But  these  three  codes  were  still  far  from  being  perfect;  for  the 
constitutions,  contained  in  them,  were  often  found  to  be  contra- 
dictory; and  they  wanted,  but  too  plainly,  that  regulation,  which 
they  afterwards  underwent  through  the  care  of  Justinian;  who 
in  the  year  of  Christ  528  ordered  the  compilation  of  a  new  code, 
which  was  performed  and  published  the  year  following  by  Tribo- 
nian  and  others  ;  the  three  former  codes  being  suppressed  by  the 
express  ordinance  of  the  Emperor.  When  this  work  was  thus 
expeditiously  finished,  the  emperor  next  extended  his  care  to  the 
Roman  law  in  general,  in  order  to  render  it  both  concise  and  per- 
fect. The  answers  and  other  writings  of  the  antient  lawyers  had 
long  since  acquired  the  full  force  of  a  law,  and  were  now  so  nume- 
rous as  to  consist  of  nearly  two  thousand  volumes;  from  which;  by 
command  of  Justinian,  the  best  and  most  equitable  opinions  were 
chosen;  and  being  first  corrected,  where  correction  was  necessary, 
were  afterwards  divided  into  fifty  books,  called  digests  or  pandects: 
and,  that  they  might  be  the  more  firmly  established,  the  Emperor 
not  only  prohibited  the  use  of  all  other  law-books,  but  also  forbad 
that  any  comment  should  be  written  upon  these  his  new  digested 
laws,  or  that  any  transcript  should  be  made  of  them  with  abbre- 
viations. But  during  the  time  of  compiling  the  digests,  it  was 
thought  expedient  by  Justinian,  for  the  benefit  of  students,  that 
an  abridgement  should  be  made  of  the  whole  Roman  law  ;  which 
•work  was  soon  performed  in  obedience  to  his  order,  and  con- 
firmed with  the  digests,  under  the  title  of  institutions. 

The  emperor  afterwards,  upon  mature  deliberation,  suppressed 
the  first  edition  of  his  code,  and  published  a  second,  which  he 
intitled  Codex  repetitce  preelections,  having  omitted  several  use- 
less laws,  and  inserted  others,  which  were  judged  serviceable  to 
the  state. 

The  Justinian  law  now  consisted  of  three  parts,  the  institutions, 
the  digests,  and  the  second  code.  But  the  emperor,  after  the 
publication  of  the  second  code,  continued  from  time  to  time  to 
enact  diverse  new  constitutions  or  novels,  and  also  several  edicts; 
all  which  were  collected  after  his  disease,  and  became  a  fourth 
part  of  the  law. 

The  thirteen  edicts  of  Justinian  and  the  most  of  the  novels  were 
originally  conceived  in  the  Greek  tongue  ;  and  so  great  was  the 
decline  of  the  Roman  language  at  Constantinople  within  forty 
years  after  the  death  of  this  emperor,  that  his  laws  in  general 
were  not  otherways  intelligible  to  the  major  part  of  the  people, 
than  by  the  assistance  of  a  Greek  version  :  but,  notwithstanding 
this  disadvantage,  they  still  subsisted  entire,  till  the  publication 

VOL.  1,    NO,  4*  B 


A  BRIEF  ACCOUNT,  &c. 


of  the  Basilica,  by  which  the  east  was  governed,  till  the  dissolu- 
tion of  the  em  pi  re. 

The  laws  published  by  Justinian  were  still  less  successful  in 
the  west ;  where,  even  in  the  life-time  of  the  emperor,  they  were 
not  received  universally  ;  and,  after  the  Lombard  invasion,  they 
became  so  totally  neglected,  that  both  the  code  and  the  pandects 
were  lost,  till  the  12th  century;  when  it  is  said,  that  the  pandects 
were  accidentally  recovered  at  Amalphi,  and  the  code  at  Ra- 
venna. But,  as  if  fortune  would  make  an  atonement  for  her 
former  severity,  they  have  since  been  the  study  of  the  wisest 
men,  and  revered,  as  law,  by  the  politest  nations. 


IMPERIAL  PROMULGATION 

IN 

CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  INSTITUTES. 


IN  THE  NAME  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 
THE  EMPEROR,  C^SAR  FLAVIUS  JUSTINIANUS,  ALE- 

MANICUS,    GOTTHICUS,    PRANCICUS,    GERMANICUS,  ANTI- 

cus,  ALANICUS,  VANDALICUS,  AFRTCANUS,  Pius,  FELIX, 
INCLYTUS,  VICTOR  AC  TRIUMPHATOR,  SEMPER  AUGUS- 
TUS, to  the  Roman  Youth  greeting. 

Of  the  use  of  Arms  and  Laws. 

THE  imperial  dignity  should  be  supported  by  arms,  and 
guarded  by  laws,  that  the  people,  in  time  of  peace  as  well  as  war, 
may  be  secured  from  dangers  and  rightly  governed  :  for  a  Roman 
Emperor  ought  not  only  to  be  victorious  over  his  enemies  in  the 
field,  but  should  also  take  every  legal  course  to  clear  the  state 
from  all  those  members,  whose  crafts  and  iniquities  are  subsersive 
of  the  law.  Be  it  the  care  therefore  of  him,  upon  whom  govern- 
ment devolves,  to  be  renowned  for  a  most  religious  observance  of 
law  and  justice,  as  well  as  for  his  triumphs. 

Of  the  Wars  and  Laws  of  Justinian. 

I.  By  our  incessant  labours,  and  the  assistance  of  divine  provi- 
dence, we  have  acquired  the  double  fame  of  a  lawgiver  and  a  con- 
queror ;   for  the  Barbarian  nations  have  proved  us  in  battle  and 
submitted  to  our  yoke  ;  even  Africa  and  many  other  provinces, 
after  so  long  an  interval,  are  again  added  to  the  Roman  empire  : 
and  yet  this  vast  people,  and  our  whole  dominions,  are  governed 
either  by   laws  enacted  by   ourselves  ;   or  laws,  which,  though 
framed  by  others,  have  by  our  sovereign  authority  been  better 
regulated. 

Of  the  Composition  of  the  Code  and  Pandects. 

II.  When  we  had  ranged  the  imperial  constitutions  in  a  regu- 
lar order,  and  made  those,  which  were  before  confused  and  contra- 
dictory, to  agree  perfectly  with  each  other,  we  then  extended  our 
care  to  the  numerous  volumes  of  the  antient  law  ;  and  have  now 
completed,  through  the  favour  of  heaven,  a  work,  which  exceeded 
even  our  hope,  and  was  attended  with  the  greatest  difficulties. 


CONFIRMATION  OF  THE  INSTITUTES. 


Of  the  end  and  use  of  the  Institutes. 

III.  As  soon  as  this  our  undertaking  was  accomplished,  we 
summoned  Tribonian,  our  chancellor,  with  Theophilus  and  Doro- 
theus,  men  of  known  learning  and  tried  fidelity,  whom  we  en- 
joined by  our  authority  to  compose  the  following  Institutions,  tq 
the  intent,  that  the  rudiments  of  law  might  be  more  effectually 
learned,  by  the  sole  means  of  our  imperial  authority  ;  and  tljat 
your  minds  for  the  future  should  not  be  burthened  with  obsolete 
and  unprofitable  doctrines,  but  instructed  only  in  those  laws, 
which  are  allowed  of  and  practised:  and,  whereas  it  was  formerly 
necessary,  that  all  students  should  go  through  a  course  of  study  ? 
at  least  for  the  space  of  four  years,  preparatory  to  their  reading 
the  constitutions,  they  may  now,  (having  been  thought  worthy  of 
our  princely  care,  to  which  they  are  indebted  for  the  beginning 
and  end  of  their  studies,)  apply  themselves  immediately  to  the 
imperial  ordinances. 

Division  of  the  Institutes. 

IV.  When  therefore,  by  the  assistance  of  Tribonian  and  other 
illustrious  persons,  we  had   digested   the  whole  antient  law  into 
fifty  books,  called  Digests  or  Pandects,  it  was  our  pleasure,  that 
the  Institutions  should  be  divided  into  four  books,  which   might 
serve  as  the  first  elements,  introductory  to  the  science  of  the  law, 

Subject  matter  of  the  Institutes. 

V.  And,  in  these,  we  have  briefly  set  forth  the  old  laws,  which 
formerly  obtained,  and  those  also,  which  fora  time  have  lain  dor* 
mant,  but  are  now  revived  by  our  princely  care. 

Authority  of  the  Institutes. 

VI.  The  four  books  of  our  Institutions  were  compiled  by  Trif 
bonian,  Theophilus,  and  Dorotheus,  from  all  the  institutions  of 
the  antient  law,  but  chiefly  from  the  commentaries,  institutions, 
and  other  writings  of  Caius.     As  soon  as  these  our  Institutions 
were  finished  and  presented  to  us,  we  read  and  diligently  exa- 
mined their  contents  ;  and,  in  testimony  of  our  approbation,  we 
have  now  given  them  a  constitutional  authority. 

Exhortation  to  the  Study  of  the  Law. 

VII.  Receive  therefore  our  laws,  and  so  profit  by  them,  that, 
when  the  course  of  your  studies  is  completely  finished,  you  may 
with  reason  expect  to  bear  a  part  in  the  government,  and  be  ena- 
bled to  exercise  those  offices,  which  are  committed  to  your  charge. 

Given  at  Constantinople  on  the  elventh  day  before  the 
calends  of  December,  in  the  third  consulate 
of  the  emperor  JUSTINIAN,  al\va}Ts  august. 


THE 

INSTITUTIONS 

OR 

ELEMENTS   OF  JUSTINIAN. 

35oofe  fyt  dfirgt. 


TITLE  I. 

OF  JUSTICE  AND  RIGHT. 
D.  i.     T.    i. 

Definition  of  Justice. 

JUSTICE  is  the  constant   and  perpetual  desire  of  giving  to 
/every  man  that,  which  is  due  to  him. 

Definition  of  Jurisprudence. 

I.  Jurisprudence  is  the  knowledge  of  things  divine  and  human, 
and  the  exact  discernment  of  what  is  just  and  unjust. 

Of  the  Method  in  treating  the  Subject  of  Right. 

II.  These  definitions  being  premised,  we  shall  now  proceed. 
But  it  seems  right  to  begin  our  Institutions  in  the  most  plain  and 
simple  manner,  although  afterwards  we  intend  to  treat  every  par- 
ticular with  the  utmost  exactness ;  for,  if  at  first  we  overload  the 
mind  of  the  student  with  a  variety  of  things,  we  may  cause  him 
either  wholly  to  abandon  his  studies,  or  bring  him  late,  through 
a  series  of  labours,  to  that  knowledge,  which  he  might  otherwise 
have  attained  with  ease  and  expedition. 

First  Precepts  of  General  Law. 

III.  The  precepts  of  the  law  are  these  :  to  live  honestly,  not  to 
hurt  any  man,  and  to  give  to  every  one  that,  which  is  his  due. 

Of  Public  and  Private  Law. 

IV.  The  law  is  divided   into  public  and  private.     Public  law 
regards  the  state  of  the  commonwealth :    but  private   law,  of 
which  we  shall  here  treat,  concerns  the  interest  of  individuals, 
and  is  tripartite,  being  collected  from  natural  precepts,  from  the 
law   of  nations,  and  from  the  civil   law  of  any  particular  city 
pr  state. 


14        THE  INSTITUTES B.  i.  T.  11. 

TITLE  II. 
OF  NATURAL  LAW,  OF  THE  LAW  OF    NATIONS,  AND 

CIVIL  LAW. 
Of  Natural  Law. 

THE  law  of  nature  is  not  a  law  to  man  only,  but  likewise  to  all 
other  animals,  whether  they  are  produced  on  the  earth,  in  the  air, 
or  in  the  waters.  From  hence  proceeds  the  conjunction  of  male 
and  female,  which  we  among  our  own  species  style  matrimony  ; 
from  hence  arises  the  procreation  of  children,  and  our  care  in 
bringing  them  up.  We  perceive  also,  that  the  rest  of  the  animal 
creation  are  regarded;  as  having  a  knowledge  of  this  law,  by 
which  they  are  actuated. 

Distinction  of  the  Jus  Gentium  and  Jus    Civile — In  Definition 
and  Etymology. 

I.  Civil  law  is  distinguished  from  the  law  of  nations,  because 
every  community  uses  partly  its  own  particular  laws,  and  partly 
the  general  laws,  which  are  common  to  all  mankind.     That  law, 
which   a  people  enacts  for  the  government  of  itself  is  called  the 
civil  law  of  that  people.      But  that  law,   which  natural  reason 
appoints  for  all  mankind,  is  called  the  law  of  nations,  because  all 
nations  make  use  of  it.   The  people  of  Rome  are  governed  partly 
by  their  own  laws,  and  partly  by  the  laws,  which  are  common 
to  all  men.     But  we  propose  to  treat  separately  of  these  laws  in 
their  proper  places. 

In  Appellation  and  Effects. 

II.  AH  civil  laws  take  their  denomination  from  that  city,  in 
which  they  are  established:  it  would  therefore  not  be  erroneous 
to  call  the  laws  of  Solon  or  Draco  the  civil  laws  of  Athens  ;  and 
thus  the  law,  which  the  Roman  people  make  use  of,  is  styled  the 
civil  law  of  the  Romans,  or  of  the  Quirites  ;  for  the  Romans  are 
also  called  Quirites  from  Quirinus.      Whenever  we  mention  the 
words  civil  law,  without  addition,  we  emphatically  denote  our  own 
law;  thus  the  Greeks,  when  they  say  the  poet,  mean  Homer,  and 
the  Romans  Virgil.      The  law  of  nations  is  common  to  mankind 
in   general,  and  all  nations   have  framed  laws  through   human 
necessity ;  for  wars  arose,  and  the  consequences  were  captivity 
and  servitude;  both  which  are  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature  ;  for 
by  that  law  all  men  are  free.     But  almost  all  contracts  were  at 
first  introduced  by  the  law  of  nations ;    as  for  intance,  buying, 
selling,  letting,  hiring,  society,  a  deposit,  a  mutuum,  and  others 
without  number. 


B.  i.  T.  ii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  15 

Division  of  the  Law  into  written  and  unwritten,  and  subdivision 
of  the  written  Law. 

III.  The  Roman  law  is  divided,  like  the  Grecian,  into  written 
and  unwritten.      The  written  is  six-fold,  and  comprehends  the 
laws,  the  plebiscites,  the  decrees  of  the  senate,  the  constitutions 
of  princes,  the  edicts  of  magistrates,  and  the  answers  of  the  sages 
of  the  law. 

Of  a  Law  and  a  Decree  of  the  People. 

IV.  A  law  is  what  the  Roman  people  enact  at  ±he  request  of 
a  senatorial  magistrate ;  as  for  instance,  at  the  request  of  a  consul. 
A  plebiscite  is  what  the  commonality  enact,  when  requested  by  a 
plebeian  magistrate,  as  by  a  tribune.      The   word   commonality 
differs  from  people,  as  a  species  from  its  genus;    for  all  the  citi- 
zens, including  patricians  and  senators,  are  comprehended  under 
the  term  people.      The  term  commonality  includes  all  the  citi- 
zens, except  patricians  and   senators.      The  plebiscites,  by  the 
Hortensian   law,  began   to   have   the  same   force,   as  the   laws 
themselves. 

Of  the  Senates  Consultant. 

V.  A  senatorial  decree  is  what  the  senate  commands  and  ap- 
points :  for,  when  the  people  of  Rome  were  increased  to  a  de- 
gree, which  made  it  difficult  for  them  to  assemble  for  the  enact- 
ing of  laws,   it  seemed  but  right,  that  the  senate  should  be  con-< 
suited  instead  of  the  whole  body  of  the  people. 

The  Constitution  of  the  Prince. 

VI.  The  constitution  of  the  prince  bath  also  the  force  of  a  law ; 
for  the  people  by  a  law,  called  lex  regia,  make  a  concession  to  him 
of  their  whole  power.     Therefore  whatever  the  emperor  ordains 
by  rescript,  decree,  or  edict,  it  is  a  law.      These  acts  are  called 
constitutions.      Of  these,  some  are  personal,  and  are  not  to  be 
drawn  into  precedent ;   for,  if  the  prince  hath  indulged  any  par- 
ticular man  upon  account  of  his  merit,  or  inflicted  any  extraordi- 
nary  punishment  on  a  criminal,  or  granted  bim  some  unprece- 
dented indulgence,  these  acts  extend  not  to  others  in  the  like  cir- 
cumstances.     But  other  constitutions  are  general,  and  undoubt- 
edly bind  all  people. 

Of  the  Honorary  Jurisdiction. 

VII.  The  edicts  of  the  praetors  are  also  of  great  authority. 
These  edicts  are  called  the  honorary  law,  because  those,  who  bear 
honours  in  the  state,  have  given  them  their  sanction.    The  curule 
aediles  also,  upon  certain  occasions,  published  their  edicts,  which 
became  a  part  of  the  jus  honorarium. 


16  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  nr. 

Of  the  Responsa  Prudentam. 

VIII.  The  answers  of  the  lawyers  are  the  opinions  of  those, 
who  were  authorised  to  give  their  answers  concerning  matters  of 
law.     For  antiently  there  were  persons,  who  publicly  interpreted 
the  law  ;  and  to  these  the  emperors  gave  a  licence  for  that  pur- 
pose.    They  were  called  jurus-consulti,  and  their   opinions  ob- 
tained so  great  an  authority,  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  a 
judge  to  recede  from  them. 

Of  the  un-written  Law. 

IX.  The  unwritten  law  is  that,  which  usage  has  approved  ;  for 
all  customs,  which  are  established  by  the  consent  of  those,  who 
use  them,  obtain  the  force  of  a  law. 

Reason  of  the  above  Division. 

X.  The  division  of  the  law,  into  written  and  unwritten,  seems 
to  have  taken  rise  from  the  peculiar   customs  of  the  Athenians 
and  Lacedemonians.     For  the  Lacedemonians  trusted  chiefly  to 
memory,  for  the  preservation  of  their  laws  ;  but  the  laws  of  the 
Athenians  were  committed  to  writing. 

Division  of  Law  into  what  is  mutable  and  what  immutable. 

XL  The  laws  of  nature,  which  are  observed  by  all  nations, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  the  appointment  of  divine  providence,  re- 
main constantly  fixed  and  immutable.  But  those  laws,  which 
every  city  has  enacted  for  the  government  of  itself,  suffer  frequent 
changes,  either  by  tacit  consent,  or  by  some  subsequent  law,  re- 
pealing a  former. 

Of  the  Objects  of  Law. 

XII.  The  laws,  which  we  make  use  of,  have  relation  either  to- 
persons,  things,  or  actions.  We  must  therefore  first  treat  of  per- 
sons ;  for  it  would  be  to  little  purpose  to  aim  at  knowledge  in 
the  law,  while  we  are  ignorant  of  persons,  on  whose  sole  account 
the  law  was  constituted. 

TITLE  IIL 

OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  PERSONS, 

D.  i.  T.  5. 
Division  of  Persons. 

THE  first  general  division  of  persons,  in.  respect  to  their 
rights,  is  into  freemen  and  slaves. 

Definition  of  Liberty. 

I.  Liberty,  or  freedom,  from  which  we  are  denominated  free* 
is  that  natural  power,  which  we  have  of  acting,  as  we  please,  if 
not  hindered  by  force,  or  restrained  by  the  law. 


s.  i.  T.  iv. OF  JUSTINIAN. 17 

Definition    of  Slavery. 

II.  Slavery  is  that,  by  which  one  man  is   made  subject  to 
another,  according  to  the  law  of  nations,  though  contrary  to 
natural  right. 

Etymology  of  the  Terms  Servus  and  Mancipium. 

III.  Slaves  are  denominated  servi,  from  the  verb  servare,   to 
preserve:  for  it  is  the  practice  of  our  generals  to  sell  their  cap- 
tives, being  accustomed  to  preserve,  and  not  to  destroy  them, 
Slaves  are  also  called  mancipia  (a  manu  caperej  in  that  they  are 
taken  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy. 

In  what  Manner  Slaves  are  constituted. 

IV.  Slaves  are  either  born  such,  or  become  so.     They  are  bom 
slaves,  when  they  are  the  children  of  bond-women  :  and  they 
become  slaves,  either  by  the  law  of  nations,  that  is,  by  captivity, 
or  by  the  civil  law,  which  happens,  when  a  free  person,  above  the 
age  of  twenty,  suffers  himself  to  be  sold,  for  the  sake  of  sharing 
the  price  given  for  him. 

The  Distinctions  of  Freedmen  and  Slaves. 

V.  In  the  condition  of  slaves  there  is  no  diversity ;  but  among 
those,  who  are  free,  there  are  many :   thus  some  are  ingenui, 
others  libertini. 


TITLE  IV. 
THE  INGENUOUS. 

Definition  of  the  Term  Ingenuous. 

THE  term  ingenuous  denotes  a  person,  who  is  free  at  the  in- 
stant of  his  birth,  by  being  born  in  matrimony  of  parents,  who 
are  both  ingenuous,  or  both  libertines ;  or  of  parents,  who  differ 
in  condition,  the  one  being  ingenuous,  and  the  other  a  libertine. 
But,  when  the  mother  is  free,  although  the  father  is  a  slave,  or 
even  unknown,  the  child  is  ingenuous :  and  when  the  mother  is 
free  at  the  time  of  the  birth  of  her  infant,  although  she  was  a 
bond-woman  when  she  conceived  it,  yet  such  infant  will  be  in- 
genuous. Also  if  a  woman,  who  was  free  at  the  time  of  con-  ' 
ception,  is  afterwards  reduced  to  slavery  and  delivered  of  a  child, 
her  issue  is,  notwithstanding  this,  free  born  ;  for  the  misfortune 
of  the  mother  ought  by  no  means  to  prejudice  her  infant.  It  has 
been  a  question,  whether  the  child  of  a  woman,  who  is  made 
free  during  pregnancy,  but  becomes  bond  before  delivery,  would 
be  free  born  ?  Martianus  proves,  that  the  child  of  such  woman 
would  be  free  :  for,  in  his  opinion,  it  is  sufficient,  if  the  mother 

VOL.  I,  No.  4.  C 


16  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  v. 

hath  been  free  at  any  time  between  conception  and  delivery  ;  and 
this  opinion  is  strictly  true, 

On  the  erroneous  Manumission  of  Ingenuous  Persons. 
I.  When  any  man  is  by  birth  ingenuous,  it  will  not  injure  him 
to  have  been  in  servitude,  and   to  have  been  afterwards  manu- 
mitted: for  there  are  diverse  constitutions,  by  which  itis  enacted, 
that  manumission  shall  not  prejudice  free  birth. 

TITLE  V. 

OF  LIBERTINES,  OR  FREEDMEN* 

Definition  and  Origin  of  Libertines  and  of  Manumissiom 
LIBERTINES,  or  freed-men,  are  those,  who  have  been  manu- 
mitted from  just  servitude.  Manumission  implies  the  giving  of 
liberty  ;  for  whoever  is  in  servitude,  is  subject  to  the  hand  and 
power  of  another ;  but  whoever  is  manumitted,  is  free  from  both. 
Manumission  took  its  rise  from  the  law  of  nations  ;  for  all  men 
by  the  law  of  nature  are  born  in  freedom ;  nor  was  manumission 
heard  of,  whilst  servitude  was  unknown.  But,  when  servitude, 
under  sanction  of  the  law  of  nations,  invaded  liberty,  the  beneGt 
of  manumission  became  then  a  consequence.  For  all  men  at  first 
were  denominated  by  one  common  appellation,  till,  by  the  law 
of  nations*  they  began  to  be  divided  into  three  classes,  viz.  into 
/lien,  or  those,  who  are  born  free;  into  servi,or  those,  who  are  in 
slavery;  and  into  libertinit  who  are  those,  who  have  ceased  to  be 
slaves,  by  having  freedom  conferred  upon  them. 
The  Modes  of  Manumission. 

I.  Manumission  is  effected  by  various  ways  ;  either  in  the  face 
of  the  church,  according  to  the  imperial  constitutions,  or  by  the 
tindicta,  or  in  the  presence  of  friends,  or  by  letter,  or  by  testa- 
ment, or  by  any  other  last  will.      Liberty  may  also  be  properly 
conferred  upon  a  slave  by  diverse  other  methods,  some  of  which 
were  introduced  by  the  constitutions  of  former  emperors,  and 
others  by  our  own. 

Time  and  Place  proper  for  Manumission. 

II.  Slaves  may  be  manumitted  by  their  masters  at  any  time, 
even  whilst  the  praetor,  the  governor  of  a  province,  or  the  pro- 
consul is  going  to  the  baths,  or  to  the  theatre. 

Qf  the  Division  of  Libertines  now  set  aside. 

III.  The  libertini  were  formerly  distinguished  by  a  threefold 
division.     Those,  who  were  manumitted,   sometimes  obtained 
what  was  called   the  greater  liberty,  and  thus  became  Roman 
citizens;  sometimes  they   obtained  only  the  lesser  liberty,  and 


.  i.  T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


became  Latins,  according  to  the  law  Junia  Norbana ;  and  some- 
times they  obtained  only  the  inferior  liberty,  and  became  Dedi- 
titii,  by  the  law  Mlia  Sentia.  But,  the  condition  of  the  Dedititii 
differing  but  little  from  slavery,  the  inferior  liberty  has  been  long 
since  disused  ;  neither  has  the  name  of  Latins  been  frequent, 
It  therefore  being  our  ardent  desire  to  extend  our  bounty,  and  to 
reduce  all  things  into  a  better  state,  we  have  amended  our  laws 
by  two  constitutions,  and  re-established  the  antient  usage ;  for 
antiently  liberty  was  simple  and  undivided;  that  is,  it  was  con- 
conferred  upon  the  slave,  as  his  manumittor  possessed  it;  ad- 
mitting this  single  difference,  that  the  person  manumitted  became 
only  a  libertine,  although  his  manumittor  was  ingenuous, 

We  have  entirely  abolished  the  name  of  Dedititii  by  a  con- 
stitution published  among  pur  decisions,  by  which,  at  the  in- 
stance of  Tribonian,  our  quaestor,  we  have  suppressed  all  dis- 
putes concerning  the  antient  law,  We  have  also,  at  the  sug- 
gestion of  the  same  illustrious  person,  altered  the  condition  of 
the  Latins,  and  corrected  the  laws,  which  related  to  them,  by 
another  constitution,  which  eminently  distinguishes  itself  among 
the  imperial  sanctions:  and  we  have  made  all  the  f reed-men  in 
general  citizens  of  Rome,  regarding  neither  the  age  of  the  person 
manumitted,  nor  of  the  manumitted,  nor  any  of  the  forms  of  ma- 
numission, as  they  were  antiently  observed.  We  have  also  intro- 
duced many  new  methods,  by  which  slaves  may  become  Roman 
citizens ;  and  the  liberty  of  becoming  such  is  that  alone,  which 
can  now  be  conferred. 


TITLE  VI. 
PERSONS  UNABLE  TO  MANUMIT,   AND  REASON  OF  THAT 

INABILITY. 
First  head  of  the  law  JElia  Sentia^  on  Manumission  with  intent 

to  defraud  Creditors. 

IT  is  not  in  the  power  of  every  master  to  manumit  at  will :  for 
•whoever  manumits  with  an  intent  to  defraud  his  creditors,  may 
be  said  to  commit  a  nullity,  the  law  JE.Ua,  Sentia  impeding  all 
liberty  thus  granted. 

Of  Emancipation  by    Will. 

I.  A  master,  who  is  insolvent,  may  appoint  a  slave  to  be  hist 
heir  with  liberty,  that  thus  the  slave  may  obtain  his  freedom,  and 
become  the  only  and  necessary  heir  of  th,e  testator,  on  suppose 
tion  that  no  other  person  is  also  heir  by  the  same  testament;  and 
this  may  happen,  either  because  no  other  person  was  instituted 
fceir,  or  because  the  person,,  so  instituted,  is  unwilling  to  act,  ax 


•20 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  vi. 


such.  This  privilege  of  masters  was  for  wise  and  just  reasons 
established  by  the  above-named  law  JElia  Sentia  :  for  it  claimed 
a  special  provision,  that  indigent  men,  to  whom  no  man  would 
be  a  voluntary  heir,  might  have  a  slave  for  a  necessary  heir  to 
satisfy  creditors;  or  otherwise,  that  the  creditors  themselves 
should  make  sale  of  the  hereditary  effects  of  the  master  in  the 
name  of  the  slave,  lest  the  deceased  should  suffer  ignominy. 
Of  constructive  Manumission. 

II.  A  slave  also  becomes  free  by  being  instituted  an  heir,  al- 
though no  mention  was  made  of  liberty  in  the  testament :  for  our 
imperial  constitution  regards  not  only  masters,  who  are  insolvent, 
but,  by  a  new  act  of  our  humanity,  it  extends  generally ;  so  that 
the  very  institution  of  an  heir  implies  tbe  conferring  of  liberty. 
For  it  is  highly  improbable,  that  a  testator,  although  he  hath 
omitted  to  mention  liberty  in  his  testament,  would  be  willing, 
that  the  person,  whom  he  hath  instituted,  should  remain  in  ser- 
vitude, since  a  testator  would  thus  defeat  his  own  purpose,  and 
be  destitute  of  an  heir. 

Of  fraudulent  Manumission. 

III.  A  man  may  be  said  to  manumit  in  order  to  defraud  credi- 
tors, if  he  is  insolvent  at  the  time,  when  he  manumits,  or  if  he  be- 
comes insolvent  by  manumitting.    It  is  however  the  prevailing 
opinion,  that  liberty,  when  granted,  is  not  impeached,  unless  the 
manumittor  had  an  intent  to  defraud,  although  his  goods  are  in- 
sufficient for  the  payment  of  his  creditors  ;   for  men  frequently 
imagine  themselves  to  be  in  better  circumstances,  than  they  really 
are.    We  therefore  understand  liberty  to  be  then  only  impeded, 
when  creditors  are  doubly  defrauded  ;  that  is,  both  by  the  inten- 
tion of  the  manumittor,  and  in  reality. 

Of  Manumission  by  Minors. 

IV.  By  the  before-named  law  M\\a  Sentia,  a  master,  under  the 
age  of  twenty  years,  cannot  manumit,  unless  a  just  cause  is  as- 
signed, which  must  be  approved  of  by  a  council,  appointed  for 
that  purpose,  at  whose  command  liberty  is  conferred  by  the 
v  indicia. 

Lawful  causes  of  Manumission. 

V.  A  minor  is  deemed  to  assign  a  just  reason  for  manumission, 
when  he  alleges  any  of  the  following,  viz.  that  the  person  to   be 
manumitted  is  his  father  or  mother,  his  son  or  daughter,  his  bro- 
ther or  sister,  his  preceptor,  his  nurse,  his  foster  child,  or  his  foster 
brother;  or  when  he  alleges,  that  he  would  manumit  his  slave, 
in  order  to  constitute  him  his  proctor;  or  his  bond-women,  with 
an  intent  to  marry  her,  on  condition,  that  the  marriage  is  performed 


B.  i.  T.  VI." OF  JUSTINIAN.  21 

within  six  months.  But  a  slave,  who  is  to  be  constituted  a  proo 
tor,  cannot  be  manumitted  for  that  purpose,  if  he  is  under 
seventeen. 

Of  assigning  a  Cause. 

VI.  A  reason,  which  has  once  been  admitted  in  fevour  of  liberty, 
whether  true  or  false,  cannot  afterwards  be  disallowed. 

Amendment  of  the  Mlian  Law. 

VII.  When  certain  bounds  were  prescribed  by  the  law  JElia 
Sentia  to  all  under  twenty,  with  regard  to  manumission,  it  was 
observed,  that  any  person,  who  was  fourteen  complete,  might 
make  a  testament,  institute  an  heir,  and  bequeath  legacies,  and 
yet  that  no  person,  under  twenty,  could  confer  liberty  ;  which  was 
not  longer  to  be  tolerated  :  for  can  any  just  cause  be  assigned, 
why  a  man,  permitted  to  dispose  of  all  his  effects  by  testament, 
should  be  debarred  from  infranchising  his   slaves  ?    But  liberty 
being  of  inestimable  value,   and  our  ancient  laws  prohibiting  any 
person  to  make  a  grant  of  it,  who  is  under  twenty  years  of  age, 
We  therefore  make  choice  of  a  middle  way,  and  permit  all,  who 
are  in  their  eighteenth  year,  to  confer  liberty  by  testament.     For 
since,  by  all  former  practice,  persons  at  eighteen-  were  permitted 
to  plead  for  their  clients,  there  is  no  reason,  why  the  same  stabi- 
lity of  judgment,  which  qualifies  them  to  assist  others,  should  not 
be  of  advantage  to  themselves,  by  enabling  them  to  infranchise 
their  own  slaves, 

TITLE  VII. 

OF  THE  FUSIAN  CANINIAN  LAW. 

By  the  law  Fusia  Caninia,  all  masters  were  restrained  from 
manumitting  more,  than  a  certain  number,  by  testament ;  but  we 
have  thought  proper  to  abrogate  this  law,  as  odious  and  destruc- 
tive of  liberty  ;  judging  it  inhuman,  that  persons  in  health  should 
have  power  to  manumit  a  whole  family,  if  no  just  cause  impedes 
the  manumission,  and  that  those,  who  are  dying,  should  be  pro- 
hibited from  doing  the  same  thing  by  testament. 


TITLE  VIII. 

THOSE  WHO  ARE  INDEPENDENT  AND  THOSE  WHO  ARB 
UNDER  THE  POWER  OF  OTHERS,  (QUI  SUI  VEL  ALIENI 
JURIS  SUNT.) 

Another  division  of  Persons. 

We  now  proceed  to  another  division  of  persons;  for  some  are 
independent,  and  some  are  subject  to  the  power  of  others.  Of 
those,  who  are  subject  to  others,  some  are  in  the  power  of  pa»-  ;-»ts 


2$  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  viii. 

others  in  the  power  of  their  masters.  Let  us  then  inquire,  what 
persons  are  in  subjection  toothers;  for,  when  we  apprehend,  who 
these  persons  are,  we  shall  at  the  same  time  discover  those,  who 
are  independent.  Our  first  inquiry  shall  be  concerning  those, 
who  are  in  the  power  of  masters. 

Of  the  Law  of  Nations  respecting  Staves. 

I.  All  slaves  are  in  the  power  of  their  masters,  which  power  is 
derived  from  the  law  of  nations :   for  it   is   equally  observable 
among  all  nations,  that  masters  have  always  had  the  power  of  life 
and  death  over  their  slaves,  and  that  whatsoever  is  acquired  by 
the  slave  is  acquired  for  the  master. 

Of  the  right  of  Roman  Citizens  over  Slaves. 

II.  All  persons,  under  our  imperial  government,  are  now  pro- 
hibited to  inflict  any  extraordinary  punishment  upon  their  slaves, 
without  a  legal  cause.     For,  by  a  constitution  of  Antoninus,  it 
is  enacted,  that  whoever  kills  his  own  slave,  without  a  just  cause, 
is  not  to  be  punished  with  less  rigour,  than  if  he  had  killed  a  slave, 
who  was  the  property  of  another.     The  too  great  severity  of  mas- 
ters is  also  restrained  by  another  constitution,  made  by  the  same 
prince:  for  Antoninus,  being  consulted  by  certain  governors  of 
provinces  concerning  those  slaves,  who  take  sanctuary  either  in 
temples,  or  at  the  statues  of  the  emperors,  Ordained,  that,  if  the 
severity  of  masters  should  appear  at  any  time  excessive,  they 
might  be  compelled  to  make  sale  of  their  slaves  upon  equitable 
terms,  so  that  the  full   worth  of  such  slaves  might  be  given  to 
masters:  and  this  constitution  seems  just  and   reasonable,   inas- 
much as  it  is  a  maxim,  expedient  for  the  commonwealth,  "  that 
no  one  should  be  permitted  to  misuse  even   his  own  property." 
The  rescript  of  this  emperor,  sent  to  ^Elius  Martianus,  is  con- 
ceived in  the  following  words  :  The  power  of  masters  over  their 
slaves  ought  by  no  means  to  be  wrongfully  diminished,  neither 
ought  any  man  to  be  deprived  of  his  just  right.     But  it  is  for  the 
interest  of  all  masters,  that  relief  against  cruelties,  the  denial  of 
sustenance,  or  any  other  insufferable  injury,  should  not  be  refused 
to  those,  who  justly  implore  it.     Therefore  take  cognizance  of  all 
complaints,  made  by  those  of  the  family  of  Julius  Sabinus,  whose 
slaves  took  sanctuary  at  the  sacred  statue  ;  and,  if  you  are  made 
sensible  of  their  having  been  more  hardly  treated  than  they  ought, 
or  of  their  having  suffered  any  great   injury,  order  them  to  be 
forthwith  sold;  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  may  never  more 
be  made  subject  to  their  former  master :  and,  if  Julius  Sabinus 
endeavours  by  any  fraud  to  evade  our  constitution,  be  it  known 
to  him,  that  such  his  offence  shall  be  punished  with   the   ut- 
most rigor. 


B.  i.  T.  ix.  OF  JUSTINIAN,  £3 


TITLE  IX. 

OF  THE  PATERNAL  POWER* 

THE  children,  whom  we  havebegotton  in  lawful  wedlock,  are 
under  our  power. 

Of  Marriage. 

T.  Matrimony  is  a  social  contract  between  a  man  and  woman,, 
obliging  them  to  an  inseparable  cohabitation  during  life. 

The  Paternal  power  peculiar  to  the  Romans. 

II.  The  power,  which  we  have  over  our  children,  is  peculiar  to 
the  citizens  of  Rome  ;  for  there  is  no  other  people,  who  have  the 
same  power  over  their  children,  which  we  have  over  ours. 

Those  subject  to  the  Paternal  power. 

III.  The  issue  of  yourself  and  your  legal  wife  are  immediately 
under  your  own  power.     Also  the  issue  of  a  son  and  sou's  wife, 
that  is,  either  grand-sons  or  grand-daughters  by  them,  are  equally 
in  your  power;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  great  grand-children, 
&c.     But  children  born  of  a  daughter  will  not  be  in  your  power, 
but  in  the  power  of  their  own  father,  or  father's  father,  &c. 

TITLE  X. 
OF  MARRIAGE. 

Of  those  who  can  legally  contract  Marriage* 
THE  citizens  of  Rome  contract  valid  matrimony,  when  they 
follow  the  precepts  of  the  law;  the  males,  when  they  arrive  at 
puberty,  and  the  females,  when  they  attain  to  a  marriageable  age. 
The  males,  whether  they  are  patres  familiarum9  fathers  of  a 
family,  ovfMifamiliarum,  the  sons  of  a  family;  but,  if  they  are 
the  sons  of  a  family,  they  must  first  obtain  the  consent  of  the 
parents,  under  whose  power  they  are.  For  reason,  both  natural 
and  civil,  convinces  us,  that  the  consent  of  parents  should  precede 
marriage:  and  from  hence  it  became  a  question,  whether  the  son 
of  a  madman  could  contract  matrimony?  But,  the  opinions  of 
lawyers  being  various,  we  published  our  decision,  by  which  the 
son,  as  well  as  the  daughter  of  a  madman,  is  permitted  to  marry 
without  the  intervention  of  his  father,  provided  always,  that  the 
rules  set  forth  in  our  constitution,  are  observed. 

Of  Parents  and  Children. 

I.  We  are  not  permitted  to  marry  all  women  without  distinction 
for  there  are  some,  with  whom  marriage  is  forbidden.  For  ma- 
trimony must  not  be  contracted  between  parents  and  their  children, 


24 THE  INSTITUTES E.  i.  T.  x, 

as  between  a  father  and  daughter,  a  grand-father  and  his  grand- 
daughter, a  mother  and  her  son,  a  grand-mother  and  her  grand- 
son; and  the  same  prohibition  extends  with  respect  to  all  ascend- 
ents and  descendents  in  a  right  line  in  infinitum.  And  if  such 
persons  cohabit  together,  they  have  said  to  have  contracted  a 
criminal  and  incestuous  marriage;  which  is  undoubtedly  true; 
inasmuch  as  those,  who  only  hold  the  place  of  parents  and  chil- 
dren by  adoption,  can  by  no  means  marry:  and  the  same  law 
remains  in  force,  even  after  the  adoption  is  dissolved.  Whoever 
therefore  hath  once  been  either  your  adopted  daughter  or  grand, 
daughter,  the  same  cannot  afterwards  be  taken  by  you  to  wife, 
although  she  hath  been  emancipated. 

Of  Brothers  and  Sisters. 

II.  Matrimony  is  also  prohibited  between  collaterals,  but  the 
prohibition  is  not  of  so  great  an  extent,  as  that,  which  relates  to 
parents  and  their  children.     A  brother  and  sister  are  forbidden  to 
marry,  whether  they  are  the  children  of  the  same  father  and  mo- 
ther, or  of  either.     And,  if  any  person  becomes  your  sister  by 
adoption,  as  long  as  such  adoption  subsists,  a  marriage  contracted 
between  her  and  you  can  not  be  valid.     But,  when  the  adoption 
is  destroyed  by  emancipation,  she  may  then  be  taken  to  wife. 
Also  if  you  yourself  are  emancipated,  there  will  not  then  remain 
any   impediment,  although  your  sister  by  adoption  is  not  so. 
From  hence  it  appears,  that,  if  a  man  would  adopt  his  son-in-law, 
he  should  first  emancipate  his  daughter,  and  that,  whoever  would 
adopt  his  daughter-in-law,  should  previously  emancipate  his  son. 

Of  the  Daughter  and  Grand- Daughter  of  a  Brother  or  Sister. 

III.  It  is  unlawful  to  marry  the  daughter  of  a  brother,  or  a 
sister;  neither  is  it  lawful  to  marry  the  grand-daughter  of  a  bro- 
ther, or  sister,  although  they  are  in  the  fourth  degree.     For  when 
we  are  prohibited  to  take  the  daughter  of  any  person  in  marriage, 
we  are  also  prohibited  to  take  his  grand-daughter.     But  it  appears 
not,  that  there  is  any  impediment  against  the  marriage  of  a  son 
with  the  daughter  of  her,  whom  his  father  hath  adopted ;  for  they 
bear  not  to  each  other  any  relation  either  natural  or  civil. 

Of  Cousins. 

IV.  The  children  of  two  brothers,  or  two  sisters,  or  of  a  bro- 
ther and  sister,  may  legally  be  joined  together  in  matrimony. 

Of  Aunts. 

V.  A  man  is  not  permitted  to  marry  his  aunt  on  the  father's 
side,  although  she  is  only  so  by  adoption;   neither  can  a  man 
marry  his  aunt  on  the  mother's  side;    because  they  are  both 
esteemed  to  be  the  representatives  of  parents.    And  for  the  same 


i.  T.  x 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


reason  no  person  can  contract  matrimony  with  his  great-aunt, 
either  an  his  father's  or  his  mother's  side. 

Of  Affinity.  —  Of  Wives,  Daughters,  and  Daughters-in-law. 

VI.  We  are  under  a  necessity  of  abstaining  from  certain  marri- 
ages, through  a  veneration  for  affinity;  for  it  is  unlawful  to  marry 
a  wife's  daughter,  or  a  son's  wife,  in  that  both  are  in  the  place 
of  daughters:  and  this  rule  must  be  understood  to  relate  not  only 
to  those,  who  actually  are,  but  also  to  those,  who  have  been,  our 
daughters-in-law  at  any  time.     For  marriage  with  a  son's  wife, 
whilst  she  continues  to  be  his  wife,  is  prohibited  on'  another 
account,  viz.  because  the  same  woman  can  not,  at  oner  and  the 
same  time,  be  the  wife  of  two.     And  the  marriage  of  a  man  with 
his  wife's  daughter,  whilst  her  mother  continues  to  be  his  wife, 
is  also  prohibited,  because  it  is  unlawful  for  one  man  to  have  two 
wives  at  the  same  time. 

Of  the  Wife's  Mother  and  a  Step-Mother. 

VII.  A  man  is  forbidden  to  marry  his  wife's  mother,   and  his 
father's  wife,  because  they  both  hold  the  place  of  mothers;    and 
this  injunction  must  be  observed,  although  the  affinity  is  dissolved: 
for,  omitting  our  veneration  for  affinity,  a  father's  wife,  whilst  she 
continues  to  be  so,  is  prohibited  to  marry,  because  no  woman  can 
have  two  husbands  at  the  same  time.     A  man  is  also  restrained 
from  matrimony  with  his  wife's  mother,  her  daughter  continuing 
to  bcrhis  wife,  because  it  is  against  the  law  to  have  two  wives. 

Of  the  Son  of  a  Husband  and  Daughter  of  a  Wife. 

VIII.  The  son  of  a  husband  by  a  former  wife,  and  the  daugh- 
ter of  a  wife  by  a  former  husband,  and  e  contra,  the  daughter  of 
a  husband  by  a  former  wife  and  the  son  of  a  wife  by  a  former 
husband  may  lawfully  contract  matrimony,  even  though  a  brother, 
or  sister,  is  born  of  such  second  marriage  between  their  respective 
parents. 

Of  Daughters  after  Divorce. 

IX.  If  a  wife,  after  divorce,  brings  forth  a  daughter  by  a  second 
husband,  such  daughter  is  not  to  be  reckoned  a  daughter-in-law 
to  the  first  husband.     It  is  nevertheless  the  opinion  of  Julian,  that 
we  ought  to  abstain  from  such  nuptials.    It  is  also  evident,  that 
the  espoused  wife  of  a  son  is  not  a  daughter-in-law  to  his  father; 
and  that  the  espoused  wife  of  a  father,  is  not  a  step-mother  to  his 
son:  yet  those,  who  abstain  from  such  nuptials,  demean  them- 
selves rightly. 

Of  servile  Cognation. 

X.  It  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  servile  cognation  is  an  im- 
pediment to  matrimony,  as  when  a  father  and  daughter,  or  a  bro- 
ther and  sister,  are  manumitted. 

VOL.  1.  NO.  4.  » 


26  THE  INSTITUTES B.  i.r.xr. 

Of  other  Prohibitions. 

XI.  There  are,  besides  these  already  mentioned,   many  other 
persons,  who,  for  diverse  reasons,  are  prohibited  to  marry  with 
each  other;  all  whom  we  have  caused  to  be  enumerated  in  the 
digests,  collected  from  the  old  law. 

Of  the  Penalties  on  unlawful  Marriages. 

XII.  If  any  persons  presume  to  cohabit  together  in  contempt 
of  the  rules,  which  we  have  here  laid  down,  they  shall  not  be 
deemed  husband  and  wife,  neither  shall  their  marriage,  or  any 
portion  given  on  account  of  such  marriage,  be  valid  ;  and  the 
children,  born  in  such  cohabitation,  shall  not  be  under  the  power 
of  their  father.    For,  in  respect  to  paternal  power,  they  resemble 
the  children  of  a  common  woman,  who  are  looked  upon  as  not 
having  a  father,  because  it  is  uncertain  who  he  is.      They  are, 
therefore,  called   in   Latin  spurii,  and  in  Greek  airaropfQ ;  i.  e. 
without  a  father :   and  from  hence  it  follows,  that,  after  the  dis- 
solution of  any  such  marriage,  no  portion,  or  gift,  propter  nuptias, 
can  legally  be  claimed.     But  those,  who  contracted  such  prohi- 
bited matrimony,  must  undergo  the  farther  punishments  set  forth 
in  our  constitutions, 

Of  Legitimation. 

XIII.  It  sometimes  happens,  that  the  children,  who  at  the 
time  of  their  birth  were  not  under  the  power  of  their  parents,  are 
reduced  under  it  afterwards.     Thus  a  natural  son,  who  is  made  a 
Decurion,  becomes  subject  to  his  father's  power ;   and  he  also, 
who  is  born  of  a  free-woman,  with  whom  marriage  is  not  prohi- 
bited, will  likewise  become  subject  to  the  power  of  his  father,  as 
soon  as  the  marriage  instruments  are  drawn,  as  our  constitution 
directs ;  which  allows  the  same  benefit  to  those,  who  are  born 
before  marriage,  as  to  those,  who  are  born  subsequent  to  it. 

TITLE  XI. 
OF  ADOPTIONS. 

Continuation. 

IT  appears  from  what  has  been  already  said,  that  all  natural 
children  are  subject  to  paternal  power.  We  must  now  add,  that 
not  only  natural  children  are  subject  to  it,  but  those  also,  whom 
we  adopt. 

Dicision  of  Adoption. 

I.  Adoption  is  made  two  ways,  either  by  a  rescript  from  the 
emperor,  or  by  the  authority  of  the  magistrate.  The  imperial 
rescript  impowers  us  to  adopt  persons  of  either  sex,  who  are  sui 
juris ;  i.  e.  independent  and  not  under  the  power  of  their  parents; 
and  this  species  of  adoption  is  called  arrogation.  But  it  is  by 


i.  T.  xi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  27 


the  authority  of  the  magistrate,  that  we  adopt  persons  actually 
under  the  power  of  their  parents,  whether  they  are  in  the  first 
degree,  as  sons  and  daughters;  or  in  any  inferior  degree,  as  grand- 
children, or  great  grand-children. 

Of  those  who  may  adopt,  and  those  ivho  may  not. 

II.  But  now,  by  our  constitution,  when  the  son  of  a  family  is 
given  in  adoption  by  his  natural  father  to  a  stranger,  the  right  of 
paternal  power  in  the  natural  father  is  not  dissolved,  neither  does 
any  thing-pass  to  the  adoptive  father,  neither  is  the  adopted  son 
in  his  {tower,   although   such  son  is  by  us  allowed  to  have  the 
right  of  succession  to  his  adoptive  father,  if  he  dies  intestate. 
But  if  a  natural  father  should  give  his  son  in  adoption,  not  to  a 
stranger,  but  to  the  maternal  grandfather  of  such  son ;   or  if  a 
natural  father,  who  hath  been  emancipated,  should  give  his  son, 
begotten  after  emancipation,  to  his  paternal  or  maternal  grand- 
father, or  great-grandfather,  in  this  case,  the  rights  of  nature  and 
adoption  concurring,  the  power  of  the  adoptive  father  is  estab- 
lished  both  by  natural  ties  and  legal  adoption,  so  that  the  adopted 
son  would  be  both  in  the  family,  and  under  the  power  of  his 
adoptive  father. 

Of  the  Arrogation  of  a  Minor. 

III.  When  any  person,  not  arrived  at  puberty,  is  arrogated  by 
the  imperial  rescript,  the  cause  is  first  inquired  into,  that  it  may 
be  known,  whether  the  arrogation  is  justly  founded,  and  expe- 
dient for  the  pupil :    for  such  arrogation  is  always  made  on  cer- 
tain conditions  ;    and  the  arrogator  is  obliged  to  give  caution  be- 
fore a  public  notary,  thereby  binding  himself,  if  the  pupil  should 
die  within  the  age  of  puberty,  to  restore  all  the  goods  and  effects 
of  such  pupil  to  those,  who  would  have  succeeded  him,  if  no  ar- 
rogation had   been  made.    The  arrogator  is  also  prohibited  to 
emancipate,   unless  he  has  given  legal  proof,  that  his  arrogated 
son  deserves  emancipation  ;  and  even  then  he  is  bound  to  make 
full  restitution,  of  all  things  belonging  to  such  son.      Also  if  a 
father,  upon  his  death-bed,  hath  disinherited  his  arrogated  son,  or 
when  in  health  hath  emancipated  him,  without  a  just  cause,  then 
the  father  is  commanded  to  leave  the  fourth  part  of  all  his  goods 
to  his  son,  besides  what  such  a  son  brought  to  him  at  the  time  of 
arrogation,  and  acquired  for  him  afterwards, 

Of  the  Age  of  the  Adoptor  and  Adopted, 

IV.  A  junior  is  not  permitted  to  adopt  a  senior;  for  adoption 
imitates  nature ;  and  it  seems  unnatural,  that  a  son  should  be, 
older  than  his  father.    He,  therefore,  who  would  either  adopt  or 
arrogate,  should  be  a  senior  to  his  adopted  or  arrogated  son  by  fuU 
puberty,  that  is,  by  eighteen  years. 


28  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  xi. 

Qf  Adoption  of  Grand -Sons  and  Grand-Daughters* 

V.  It  is  lawful  to  adopt  a  person  either  as  a  grand-son  or 
grand-daughter,  great  grand-son  or  great  grand-daughter,  or  in  a 
more  distant  degree,  although  the  adoptor  hath  no  son. 

VI.  A  man  may  adopt  the  son  of  another  as  his  grand-son,  and 
the  grand-son  of  another  as  his  son. 

Of  Adoption  in  place  of  Grand-Son. 

VII.  If  any  man,  who  has  already  either  a  natural  or  an  adopted 
son,  is  desirous  to  adopt  another,  as  his  grand-son,  the  consent  of 
his  son,  whether  natural  or  adopted,  ought  in  this  case  to  be  first 
obtained,  lest  a  suns  ha>rest  or  proper  heir,  should  be  intruded 
upon  him.     But,  on  the  contrary,  if  a  grand-father  is  willing  tq 
give  his  grand-son  in   adoption,   the    consent  of  the  son  is  not 
necessary. 

Of  those  who  may  be  adopted. 

VIII.  He,  who  is  either  adopted  or  arrogated,  bears  similitude 
in  many  things  to  a  son  born  in  lawful  matrimony  ;   aud  there- 
fore, whoever  is  adopted  either  by  rescript,  or  before  a  praetor,  or 
before  the  governor  of  a  province,  the  same,  if  he  is  nqt  a  stranger, 
may  be  given  in  adoption  to  another. 

Of  Adoption  by  Impolents. 

IX.  It  is  observed  as  a  common  rule  both  in  adoption,  and  arro* 
gation,  that  such,  who  are  impotent  [whom  we  denominate  Spa~ 
dones~\  may  adopt  children ;   but  that  those,  who  are  castrated, 
can  not  adopt. 

Of  Adoption  by  Women. 

X.  Women  are  also  prohibited  to  adopt;  for  the  law  does  not 
permit  them  to  have  even  their  own  children  under  their  power; 
but,  when  death  hath  deprived  them  of  their  children,  they  may, 
by  the  indulgence  of  the  prince,  adopt  others,  as  a  comfort  and 
fecom pence  for  their  loss. 

Of  Adoption  by  Rescript. 

XI.  It  is  peculiar  to  that  kind  of  adoption,  which  is  made  by- 
rescript,  that,  if  a  person,  having  children  under  his  power,  should 
give  himself  in  arrogation,  both  he,  as  a  son,  and  his  children,  as 
grand-children,  would  become  subject  to  the  power  of  the  arro- 
gator.     It  was  for  this  reason,  that  Augustus  did  not  adopt  Tiber 
rius,  till  Tiberius  had  adopted  Germariicus;    so  that  Tiberius 
became  the  son,  and  Germanicus  the  grand-son  of  Augustus,  at 
the  same  instant,  by  arrogation. 

Of  the  Adoption  of  Slaves. 

XII.  The  following  answer  of  Cato  was  approved  of  by  the 
antient  lawyers,  viz.  that  slaves,  adopted  by  their  masters,  obtain 


a.  i.  T.  xir.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


freedom  by  the  adoption.  And,  from  hence  instructed,  we  have 
enacted  by  our  constitution,  that  a  slave,  whom  any  master  nomi- 
nates to  be  his  son,  in  the  presence  of  a  magistrate,  becomes  free 
by  such  nomination,  although  it  does  not  convey  to  him  any  filial 
right. 


TITLE  XII. 
How  THE  PATERNAL  POWER  (PATRICE  POTESTAS)  MAY   BE 

TERMINATED. 

Of  Death. 

LET  us  now  inquire  how  those,  who  are  in  subjection  toothers, 
can  be  freed  from  that  subjection.  The  means,  by  which  slaves 
obtain  their  liberty,  may  be  fully  understood  by  what  we  have 
already  said  in  treating  of  manumission :  but  those,  who  are  under 
the  power  of  a  parent,  become  independent  at  his  death,  yet  this 
rule  admits  of  a  distinction.  When  a  father  dies,  his  sons  and 
daughters  are,  without  doubt,  independent;  but,  by  the  death  of 
a  grand-father,  his  grand-children  do  not  become  independent 
unless  it  happens,  that  there  is  an  impossibility  of  their  ever  falling 
under  the  power  of  their  father.  Therefore,  if  their  father  is 
alive  at  the  death  of  their  grand-father,  and  they  are  till  then 
under  his  power, Jthe  grand-children  in  this  case,  become  subject 
to  the  power  of  their  father.  But,  if  their  father  is  either  dead  or 
emancipated  before  the  death  of  their  grand-father,  they  then 
can  not  fall  under  the  power  of  their  father,  and  therefore  become 
independent. 

Of  Deportation. 

I.  If  a  man,  upon  conviction  of  some  crime,  is  deported  into 
an  island,  he  lo&  s  the  rights  of  a  Roman  citizen;  and  it  follows, 
that  the  children  of  such  a  person  cease  to  be  under  his  power,  as 
ff  he  was  naturally  dead.    And,  by  a  parity  of  reasoning,  if  a  son 
is  deported,  he  ceases  to  be  under  the  power  of  his  father.     But, 
if  by  the  indulgence  of  the  prince  a  criminal  is  wholly  restored, 
he  regains  instantly  his  former  condition. 

Of  Relegation. 

II.  A  Father,  who  is  relegated,  retains  his  paternal  power;  and 
a  son,  who  is  relegated,  still  remains  under  the  power  of  his  father. 

Of  those  reduced  to  Slavery  by  Law. 

III.  When  a  man  is  judicially  pronounced  to  be  the  slave  of 
punishment,  he  loses  his  paternal  jurisdiction.     The  slaves  of  pu- 
nishment are  those,  who  are  condemned  to  the  mines,  or  sentenced 
to  be  destroyed  by  wild  beasts. 


30  THE  INSTITUTES B.  i.  T.  xir. 

Of  Dignity. 

IV.  If  the  son  of  a  family  becomes  a  soldier,  a  senator,  or  a  con- 
sul, he  still  remains  under  the  power  of  his  father,  from  which 
neither  the  army,  the  senate,  nor  consular  dignity  can  emancipate 
him.     But  it  is  enacted  by  our  constitution,  that  the  patrician  dig- 
nity, conferred  by  our  special  diploma,  shall  free  every  son  from 
alfp'aternal  subjection.     For  it  is  absurd  to  think,  that  a  parent 
may  emancipate  his  son,  and  that  the  power  of  an  emperor  should 
not  be  sufficient  to  make  any  person  independent,  whom  he  hath 
chosen  to  be  a  father  of  the  commonwealth  ;  or,  in  other  words, 
a  senator. 

Of  Captivity  and  Postlimmium. 

V.  If  a  parent  is  taken  prisoner  by  the  enemy,  altho'  he  thus  be- 
comes a  slave,  yet  he  loses  not  his  paternal  power,  which  remains 
in  suspense  by  reason  of  a  privilege  granted  to  all  prisoners; 
namely,  the  right  of  return:  for  captives,  when  they  obtain  their 
liberty,  are  repossessed  of  all  their  former  rights,  in  which  paternal 
power  of  course  must  be  included  ;  and,  at  their  return,  they  are 
supposed,  by  a  fiction  of  law,  never  to  have  been  absent.  If  a  pri- 
soner dies  in  captivity,  his  son  is  deemed  to  have  become  inde- 
pendent, not  from  the  time  of  the  death  of  his  father,  but  from 
the  commencement  of  his  captivity.    Also,  if  a  son,  or  grand-son, 
becomes  a  prisoner,  the  power  of  the  parent  is  said,  for  the  rea- 
son before  assigned,  to  be  only  in  suspense.     The  term  postlimi- 
nium  is  derived  from  post  and  limen.     We  therefore  aptly  use  the 
expression  reversus  postliminio,  when  a  person,  who  was  a  cap- 
tive, returns  within  our  own  confines. 

Of  Emancipation  and  its  Effects. 

VI.  Children  also  cease  to  be  under  the  power  of  their  parents 
by  emancipation.     Emancipation  was  effected  according  to  our 
antient  law,  either  by  imaginary  sales  and  intervening  manumis- 
sions, or  by  the  imperial  rescript;  but  it  has  been  our  care  to  re- 
form these  ceremonies  by  an  express  constitution,  so  that  parents 
may  now  have  immediate  recourse  to  the  proper  judge  or  magis- 
trate, and  emancipate  their  children,  grand-children,  &c.  of  both 
sexes.     And  also,  by  a  praetorian  edict,  the  parent  is  allowed  to 
have  the  same  right  in  the  goods  of  those,  whom  he  emancipates, 
as  a  patron  has  in  the  goods  of  hisfreed-man.     And,  farther,  if  the 
children  emancipated  are  within  the  age  of  puberty,  the  parent, 
by  whom  they  were  emancipated,  obtains  the  right  of  wardship 
or  tutelage,  by  the  emancipation. 

VII.  A  parent  having  a  son  under  his  power,  and  by  that  son  a 
grandson  or  grand-daughter,  may  emancipate  his  son,  and  yet  re- 


fi.  i.  T.  xi ir.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  31 

tain  his  grand-son  or  grand-daughter  in  subjection.  He  may  also 
manumit,  his  grandson  or  grand-daughter,  and  still  retain  his  son 
under  his  power;  or,  if  he  is  so  disposed,  he  may  make  them 
all  independent.  And  the  same  may  be  said  of  a  great-grandson, 
or  a  great-grand-daughter. 

Of  Adoption. 

VIII.  If  a  father  gives  his  son  in  adoption  to  the  nntural  grand-fa- 
ther or  great-grand-father  of  such  son,  strictly  adhering  to  the  rules 
laid  down  in  our  constitutions  for  that  purpose  enacted,  which  in- 
join  the  parent  to  make  his  intention  manifest  before  a  competent 
judge,  in  the  presence  of  the  person  to  be  adopted,  in  no  wise 
contradicting,  and  also  in  the  presence  of  the  adoptor,  then  does 
the  right  of  paternal  power  pass  wholly  from  the  natural  father  to 
the  adoptive,  in  whose  person,  as  we  have  before  observed,  adop- 
tion has  its  fullest  extent. 

Of  Grandson  born  after  the  Son  was  Emancipated. 

IX.  It  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that,  if  a  son's  wife  hath  con- 
ceived, and  you  afterwards  emancipate  that  son  or  give  him  in 
adoption,  his  wife  being  pregnant,  the  child,  which  she  brings 
forth,  will,  notwithstanding  this,  be  born  under  your  paternal  au- 
thority.    But,  if  the  conception  is  subsequent  to  the  emancipation 
or  adoption,  the  child  so  conceived  becomes  subject,  at  his  birth, 
either  to  his  emancipated  father,  or  his  adoptive  grand-father. 

Children  cannot  compel  their  Paye?$£  to  Emancipate. 

X.  Children,  either  natural  or  adopted,  can  rarely  compel  their 
parents  by  any  method  to  dismiss  them  fr$m  subjection. 

TITLE  XIII. 
OF  TUTELAGE. 

Of  Persons  in  their  own  Right. 

LET  us  now  proceed  to  another  division  of  persons.  Of  those, 
who  are  not  in  the  power  of  their  parents,  some  are  under  tutelage, 
some  under  curation,  and  some  under  neither.  Let  us  then  inquire 
what  persons  are  under  tutelage  and  curation;  for  thus  we  shall 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  those,  who  are  not  subject  to  either. 
We  will  first  treat  of  those  persons,  who  are  under  tutelage. 
Definition  of  Tutelage. 

I.  Tutelage,  as  Sermus  has  defined  it,  is  an  authority  and  power, 
given  and  permitted  by  the  civil  law,  and  exercised  over  such 
independent  persons,  who  are  unable,  by  reason  of  their  age,  to 
protect  themselves. 


3-2  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  xir. 


Definition  of  a  Tutor. 

II.  Tutors  are  those,  who  have  the  authority  and  power  before 
mentioned ;  and  they  take  their  name  from  the  nature  of  their  of- 
fice.    For  they  are  called  tutors,  quasi  tuitores ;  as  those,  who 
have  the  care  of  the  sacred  buildings,  are  called  ceditui,  quod  cedes 
tueantur. 

Of  Tutors  by  Will. 

III.  Parents  are  permitted  to  assign  tutors  by  testament  to  such 
of  their  children,  who  are  not  arrived  at  puberty,  and  are  under 
their  power.     And  this  privilege  of  parents  extends  without  ex- 
ception over  sons  and  daughters.     But  grand-fathers  can  only  give 
tutors  to  their  grand-children,  when  it  is  impossible,  that  such 
grand-children  should  ever  fall  under  the  power  of  their  father, 
after  the  death  of  their  grand-father.     And  therefore,  if  your  son 
is  in  your  power  at  the  time  of  your  death,  your  grand-children  by 
that  son  cannot  receive  tutors  by  your  testament,  although  they 
were  actually  in  your  power,  because  at  your  decease  they  will 
become  subject  to  their  father. 

Of  Posthumous  Children. 

IV.  As  posthumous  children  are  in  many  cases  reputed  to  have 
been  born  before  the  death  of  their  fathers  ;  therefore  tutors  may 
be  given  by  the  testament  of  a  parent  as  well  to  a  posthumous 
child,  as  to  a  child  already  born,  if  such  posthumous  child,  had  he 
been  born  in  the  life-time  of  his  father,  would  have  been  his  pro- 
per heir  and  under  frig  =power. 

Ofltefaancipated  Children. 

V.  But  if  a  father  gives  a  tutor  by  testament  to  his  emancipated 
son,  such  tutor  must  be  confirmed  by  the  sentence  of  the  governor 
of  the  province  without  inquisition. 

TITLE  XIV. 

OF    WHO    MAY    BE    NOMINATED    TUTORS    BY    WlLL. 

NOT  only  the  father  of  a  family  may  be  appointed  by  testa- 
ment to  be  a  tutor,  but  also  the  son  of  a  family. 

Of  a  Slave. 

I.  Amanmay  by  testamentassign  hisownslave  tobea  tutor  with 
liberty.  But  note,  that,  if  a  master  by  testament  appoints  his  slave 
to  be  a  tutor  without  mentioning  liberty,  such  slave  seems  tacitly 
to  have  received  immediate  liberty,  and  is  thus  legally  enabled  ta 
commence  a  tutor:  yet,  if  a  testator  through  error,  imagining  his 
slave  to  be  a  free  person,  by  testament  appoints  him  as  such,  to 
be  a  tutor,  the  appointment  will  not  avail.  Also  the  absolute 


B.  i.  T.  xv,  OF  JUSTINIAN.  33 

appointment  of  another  man's  slave  to  be  a  tutor  is  altogether 
ineffectual:  but,  if  the  appointment  is  upon  condition,  that  the 
person  appointed  obtains  his  freedom,  then  it  is  made  profitably: 
but,  if  a  man  by  testament  appoints  his  own  slave  to  be  a  tutor, 
when  he  shall  obtain  his  liberty,  the  appointment  will  be  void. 

Of  Minors  and  Madmen. 

II.  If  a  madman,  or  a  minor,  is  by  testament  appointed  to  be  a 
tutor,  the  one  shall  begin  to  act,  when  he  becomes  of  sound  mind, 
and  the  other,  when  he  has  completed  his  twenty-fifth  year. 

III.  It  is  not  doubted,  but  that  a  testamentary  tutor  may  be 
given  either  to  a  certain  time,  or  from  a  certain  time,  or  conditio- 
nally, or  before  the  institution  of  an  heir. 

Tutors  are  Personal* 

IV.  A- tutor  can  not  be  assigned  to  any  particular  thing,   or 
upon  any  certain  account,  but  can  only  be  given  to  persons* 

Of  Tutors  generally. 

V.  If  a  man  by  testament  nominates  a  tutor  for  his  sons  or  his 
daughters,  the  same  person  seems  also  to  be  appointed  tutor  to 
his  posthumous  issue;  because,   under  the  appellation  of  son  or 
daughter,  a  posthumous  child  is  comprehended.  But,  should  it  be 
questioned,  whether  grand-children  are  denoted  by  the  word  sons, 
and  can  receive  tutors  by  that  denomination,  we  answer  that  un- 
der the  general  term,  children,  grand-children  are  undoubtedly  in* 
eluded,  but  that  the  word  sons  does  not  comprehend  them:  for 
the  word  son,  and  grandson,  widely  differ  in  their  signification. 
But,  if  a  testator  assigns  a  tutor  to  his  descendents,  it  is  evident, 
that  not  only  his  posthumous  sons  are  comprehended,  but  all  his 
other  children. 

TITLE  XV. 

OF  THE  LAWFUL  TUTELAGE  OF  AGNATES* 
THE  Agnati  are,  by  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  appointed  to 
be  tutors  to  those,  to  whom  no  testamentary  tutor  was  given  j  and 
these  tutors  are  called  legitime. 

Who  are  Agnates* 

I.  Agnati  are  those,  who  are  collaterally  related  to  us  by  males, 
as  a  brother  by  the  same  father,  or  the  son  of  a  brother,  or  by  him 
a  grandson  ;  also  a  father's  brother,  or  the  son  of  such  brother,  or 
by  him  a  grandson.  But  those,  who  are  related  to  us  by  a  female 
are  not  said  to  be  agnate,  but  cognate,  bearing  only  a  natural  re- 
lation to  us.  Thus  the  son  of  a  father's  sister  is  not  related  to  you 
by  agnation  but  by  cognation,  and  you  are  related  to  him  in  the 
VOL.  I.  No.  4.  E 


34  THE  INSTITUTES    .  B.  i.  T.  xvi. 


same  manner;  that  is,  by  cognation;  for  the  children  of  a  fa- 
ther's sister  follow  the  family  of  their  father,  and  not  that  of 
their  mother. 

II.  The  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  in  calling  the  agnati  to  tutel- 
age in  case  of  intestacy,  relates  not  solely  to  persons  altogether  in- 
testate, in  whose  power  it  was  to  have  appointed  a  tutor,  but  ex- 
tends also  to  those,  who  are  intestate  only  in  respect  to  tutelage  ; 
and  this  may  happen,  if  a  tutor,  nominated  by  testament,  should 
die  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator. 

How  the  Rights  of  Agnation  and  Cognation  are  lost. 

III.  The  right  of  agnation  is  taken  away  by  almost  every  dimi- 
nution, or  change  of  state ;  for  agnation  is  but  a  name  given  by 
the  civil  law;   but  the  right  of  cognation  is  not  thus  altered  ;  for 
although  civil  policy  may  extinguish  civil  rights,  yet  over  our  na- 
tural rights  it  has  no  such  power. 

TITLE  XVL- 
OF  DIMINUTION. 

DIMINUTION  is  the  change  of  a  man's  former  condition, 
which  is  effected  three  ways,  according  to  the  threefold  division  of 
dimnution  into  the  greater,  the  less,  and  the  least. 
Of  the  greater  Diminution. 

I.  The  greater  diminution  is,  when  a  man  loses  both  the  right 
of  a  citizen  and  his  liberty,  which  is  the  case  of  those,  who  by  the 
rigor  of  their  sentence  are  pronounced  to  be  the  slaves  of  punish- 
ment  and  of  freed-men,  who  are  condemned  to  slavery  for  in- 
gratitude to  their  patrons and  of  all  such,  who  suffer  them- 
selves to  be  sold,  in  order  to  become  sharers  of  the  price. 

Of  the  loss  Diminution. 

II.  The  less  or  mesne  diminution  is,  when  a  man  loses  the 
rights  of  a  citizen,  but  retains  his  liberty ;  which  happens  to  him, 
who  is  forbibden  the  use  of  fire  and  water,  or  to  him,  who  is 
transported  into  an  island. 

Of  the  least  Diminution. 

III.  The  least  diminution  is  then  said  to  have  been  suffered, 
when  the  condition  of  a  man  is  changed  without  the  forfeiture 
either  of  his  civil  rights,  or  his  liberty ;  as  when  he,  who  is  inde- 
pendent, becomes  subject  by  adoption ;  or  when  the  son  of  a  fa- 
mily hath  been  emancipated  by  his  father. 

Of  the  Manumisson  of  a  Slave. 

IV.  The  manumission  of  a  slave  works  not  any  change  of  state  in 
him,  because  he  had,  before  manumission,  no  state  or  civil  capacity. 


B.  i.  T.  xvu. OF  JUSTINIAN.         35 

Of  Change  of  Rank. 

V.  Those,  whose  dignity  is  rather  changed  than  their  state,  are 
not  said  to  have  suffered  diminution;  and  therefore  it  appears, 
that  they,  who  are  removed  from  the  senatorial  dignity,  do  not 
suffer  diminution. 

VI.  What  has  already  been  said  in  a  section  of  the  preceding 
title,  to  wit,  that  the  right  of  cognation  remains  after  diminution, 
relates  only  to  the  least  diminution.     For,  by  the  greater  diminu- 
tion, as  for  instance,  by  servitude,  the  right  of  cognation  is  wholly 
destroyed,  even  so  as  not  to  be  recovered  by  manumission.    The 
right  of  cognation  is  also  lost  by  the  lessor  meme  diminution, as 
by  deportation  into  an  island. 

To  what  Agnail  the  Right  of  Tutelage  belongs. 

VII.  Although  the  right  of  tutelage  belongs  to  the  agnati,  yet 
it  belongs  not  to  all  the  agnatiin  common,  but  to  those  only,  who 
are  in  the  nearest  degree.     But,  if  there  are  many  in  the  same  de- 
gree, the  tutelage  belongs  to  all  of  them,  however  numerous.  For 
example,  if  there  are  several  brothers,  they  are  called  equally 
to  tutelage. 

TITLE  XVII. 

OF  THE  TUTELAGE  OF  FREED-MEJT. 

BY  the  same  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  the  tutelage  of  freed-men, 
and  freed-women,  is  adjudged  to  belong  to  tbeir  patrons,  and  to 
.the  children  of  such  patrons:  and  this  tutelage  is  called  legitime, 
although  it  exists  not  nominally  in  the  law;  but  it  is  as  firmly 
established  by  interpretation,  as  if  It  had  been  introduced  by 
express  word*.  For,  inasmuch  as  the  law  commands,  that  patrons 
and  their  children  shall  succeed  to  the  inheritance  of  their  freed- 
men  or  freed-women,  who  die  intestate,  it  was  the  opinion  of  the 
antient  lawyers,  that  tutelage  also  by  implication  should  belong 
to  patrons  and  their  children.  And  the  law,  which  calls  the 
agnati  to  the  inheritance,  commands  them  to  be  tutors,  because 
the  advantage  of  succession  ought  to  be  attended  in  most  cases 
\vith  the  burden  of  tutelage.  We  have  said,  in  most  cases,  because 
when  any  person,  not  arrived  at  puberty,  is  manumitted  by  a  fe- 
male, such  female  is  called  to  the  inheritance,  but  not  to  the 
tutelage. 

TITLE  XVIII. 

OF    THE    LEGITIME    TlJTELAGB    OF    PARENTS, 

IN  similitude  of  the  tutelage  of  patrons,  another  kind  of  tutelage 
ii  received,  which  is  also  called  legitime;  for  if  any  parent 


36  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  xvin. 

cipatesa  son  or  a  daughter,  or  a  grand-son  or  a  grand-daughter, 
who  is  the  issue  of  that  son,  or  any  others  descended  from  him  by 
males  in  a  right  line  and  not  arrived  at  puberty,  then  shall  such 
parent  be  their  legitime  tutor. 

TITLE  XIX. 
FIPUCIARY  TUTELAGE. 

THERE  is  another  king  of  tutelage  catted  fiduciary  :  for,  if  a 
parenj  emancipates  a  son  or  a  daughter,  a  grandson  or  a  grand- 
daughter, or  any  other  of  his  children,  not  arrived  at  puberty,  he 
is  then  their  legitime  tutor:  but,  at  his  death,  his  male  children 
of  age  become  l\\e  fiduciary  tutors  of  their  own  sons,  qr  of  a  bro- 
ther, a  sister,  or  of  a  brother's  children  emancipated  by  the  de- 
ceased. 3ut,  when  a  patron,  who  is  a  legitime  tutqr,  dies,  his  child- 
ren also  become  legitime  tutors.  The  reason  of  which  difference 
is  this:  a  son,  although  he  was  never  emancipated,  becpmes  inde- 
pendent at  the  death  of  his  father;  and  therefore,  as  he  falls  not 
under  the  power  of  his  brothers,  it  follows,  that  he  can  not  be 
under  their  legitime  tutelage.  But  the  condition  of  a  slave  is  not 
altered  at  the  death  of  his  master;  for  he  then  becomes  a  slave  to 
the  children  of  the  deceased.  It  must  here  be  noted,  that  the 
persons  above  mentioned  can  not  be  called  to  tutelage,  unless 
they  are  of  full  age;  and  our  constitution  hath  in  general  com- 
manded this  rule  to  be  observed  in  all  tutelages  and  curations. 


TITLE  XX. 
OF  THE  ATILIAN,  JULIAN,  AND  TITIAN, 

BY  virtue  of  the  law  Atilia,  fhe  praetor  of  the  city,  with  a  ma- 
jority of  the  tribunes,  had  authority  to  assign  tutors  to  all  such, 
who  otherwise  were  not  intitled  to  tutors:  but,  in  the  provinces, 
tutors  were  appointed  by  the  respective  governors  of  each  prp- 
yince,  in  consequence  of  the  law  Julia  and  Titia. 
Of  contingent  Tutors. 

\.  If  a  tutor  had  been  given  by  testament  conditionally,  or  from 
a  certain  day,  another  tutor  might  have  been  assigned  by  virtue 
of  the  above  named  laws,  whilst  the  condition  depended,  or  tjll 
the  day  came.  Also  if  a  tutor  had  been  given  simply,  i.  e.  upon 
no  condition,  yet,  as  long  as  the  testamentary  heir  deferred  taking 
upon  him  the  inheritance,  another  tutor  might  have  been  appointed 
during  the  interval.  But  the  office  of  such  tutor  ceased,  when  the 
cause  ceased,  for  which  he  was  appointed ;  as  when  the  event  of 
the  condition  happened,  the  day  came,  or  the  inheritance  was 
entered  upon. 


B.  i.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  37 

If  the  Tutor  was  taken  by  the  Enemy. 

II.  By  the  Atilian  and  Julio-titlan  laws,  if  a  tutor  was  taken 
by  the  enemy,  another  tutor  was  immediately  requested,  whose 
office  ceased  of  course,  when  the  first  tutor  returned  from  capti- 
vity; for  he  then  resumed  the  tutelage  by  his  right  of  return. 

Of  the  disuse  of  the  Atilian  law. 

III.  The  Atilian  and  Julio-titian  laws,  concerning  the  appoint- 
ment of  tutors,  were  first  disused,  when  the  consuls  began  to  give 
tutors  to  pupils  of  either  sex,  with  inquisition;  and  the  praetors 
were  afterwards  invested  with  the  same  authority  by  the  imperial 
constitutions.     For,  by  the  above  mentioned  laws,  no  caution  was 
required  from  the  tutors  for  the  security  of  their  pupils,  neither 
were  these  tutors  compelled  to  act. 

Of  the  present  law  of  Tutelage. 

IV.  But,  by  the  latter  usage,  at  Rome  the  prefect  of  the  city, 
or  the  praetor  according  to  his  jurisdiction,  and,  in  the  provinces, 
the  governors,  (each  in  his  respective  province)  may  assign  tutors, 
after  an  inquiry  into  their  morals  and  circumstances:  and  an  infe- 
rior magistrate,  at  the  command  of  a  governor,  may  also  appoint 
tutors,  if  the  possessions  of  the  pupil  are  not  large. 

Law  of  Justinian. 

V.  But  we,  for  the  ease  of  our  subjects,  have  ordained  by  our 
constitution,  that  the  judge  of  Alexandria  and  the  magistrates  of 
every  city,  together  with  the  chief  ecclesiastic,  may  give  tutors  or 
curators  to  pupils  or  adults,  whose  fortunes  do  not  exceed  five 
hundred  aurei,  without  waiting  for  the  command  of  the  governor, 
to  whose  province  they  belong.      But  all  such  magistrates  must, 
at  their  peril,  take  from  every  tutor,  so  appointed,  the  caution 
required  by  our  constitution. 

Reason  of  Tutelage.  / 

VI.  It  is  agreeable  to  the  law  of  nature,  that  all  such,  who  are 
not  arrived  at  puberty,  should  be  put  under  tutelage,  to  the  in- 
tent that  all,  who  are  not  adults,  may  be  under  the  government 
of  proper  persons. 

Of  Accounts  by  Tutors. 

VII.  Tutors  therefore,  since  they  have  the  administration  of 
the  affairs  of  their  pupils,  may  be  compelled  to  render  an  account, 
by  an  action  of  tutelage,  when  their  pupils  arrive  at  puberty. 

TITLE  XXI. 

OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  TUTORS. 

THE  authority  or  confirmation  of  a  tutor  is  in  some  cases  neces- 
sary, and  in  others  not  necessary.     When  a  man  stipulates  to  make 


33       THE  INSTITUTES s.  i.  T.  xxi. 

a  gift  to  a  pupil,  the  authority  of  the  tutor  is  not  requisite;  but, 
if  a  pupil  enters  into  a  contract,  there  is  a  necessity  for  the  tutor's 
authority  ;  for  it  is  an  established  rule,  that  pupils  may  better  their 
condition,  but  not  impair  it,  without  the  authority  of  their  tutors. 
And  therefore  in  all  cases,  where  there  are  mutual  obligations, 
as  in  buying,  selling,  letting,  hiring,  mandates,  deposites,  &c.  he, 
who  contracts  with  the  pupil,  is  bound  by  the  contract;  but  the 
pupil  is  not  bound,  unless  the  tutor  hath  authorised  it. 

Exception. 

I.  But  no  pupil,  without  the  authority  of  his  tutor,  can  enter 
upon  an  inheritance,  or  take  upon  him  the  possession  of  goods, 
or  an  inheritance  in  trust ;  for,  although  there  may  be  a  probabi- 
lity of 'profit,  there  is  a  possibility  of  damage. 

How  the  Tutor  is  to  exert  his  Authority. 

II.  If  a  tutor  would  authorise  any  act,  which  he  esteems  advan- 
tageous to  his  pupil,  such  tutor  ought  to  be  present  at  the  nego- 
tiation :  for  the  authority  of  a  tutor  can  have  no  effect,  when 
given  by  letter,  by  messenger,  or  after  a  contract  is  finished. 

A  Case  in  which  a  Tutor  cannot  act. 

III.  When  a  suit  is  to  be  commenced  between  a  tutor  and  his 
pupil,  inasmuch  as  the  tutor  cannot  exercise   his  authority,  as 
«uch,  against  himself,  a  curator,  and  not  a  praetorian  tutor,  (as  it 
was  formerly  the  custom,)  is  appointed,  by  whose  intervention 
the  suit  is  carried  on ;  and,  when  it  is  determined,  the  curator- 
ship  ceases. 


TITLE  XXII. 
How  TUTELAGE  is  TERMINATED. 

Of  Puberty. 

PUPILS,  both  male  and  female,  are  free  from  tutelage,  when 
they  arrive  at  puberty.  The  ancients  judged  of  puberty  in  males, 
not  by  years  only,  but  also  by  the  habit  of  their  bodies.  But  our 
imperial  majesty,  regarding  the  purity  of  the  present  times,  hath 
esteemed  the  inspection  of  males  to  be  an  immodest  practice, 
and  hath  thought  it  proper,  that  the  same  decency,  which  was 
ever  observed  in  respect  to  females,  should  be  also  observed  in 
respect  to  males  :  and  therefore,  by  our  sacred  constitution,  we 
have  enacted,  that  puberty  in  males  should  be  reputed  to  com- 
mence immediately  after  the  completion  of  their  fourteenth  year. 
But,  in  relation  to  females,  we  leave  that  wholesome  and  antient 
rule  of  law  unaltered,  by  which  they  are  esteemed  marriageable 
after  the  twelfth  year  of  their  age  is  completed. 


B.  i.  T.  xxii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  39 

Of  the  Diminution  of  the  Pupil. 

I.  Tutelage  is  determined  before  puberty,  if  the  pupil  is  either 
arrogated  or  suffers  deportation  ;  and  it  also  determines,  if  he  isr 
reduced  to  slavery,  or  becomes  a  captive. 

Of  a  conditional  Tutor. 

II.  But,  if  a  testamentary  tutor  is  given  upon  a  certain  condi- 
tion, after  that  condition  is  fulfilled,  the  tutelage  ceases. 

Of  the  death  of  Tutor  or  Pupil. 

III.  Tutelage  is  also  determined  either  by  the  death  of  the  tu- 
tor, or  by  the  death  of  the  pupil. 

Of  the  Diminution  of  Tutor  or  Pupil. 

IV.  When  a  tutor  suffers  the  greater  diminution  of  state,  by 
which  he  at  once  loses  his  liberty  arid  the  privileges  of  a  citizen, 
every  kind  of  tutelage  is  then  extinguished.     But,  if  the  least 
diminution  is  only  suffered,  as  when  a  tutor  gives  himself  in  arro- 
gation,   then   no  species  of  tutelage  is  extinguished,  except  the 
legitime.    But  every  diminution  of  state  in  pupils  takes  away 
all  tutelage. 

Of  the  term  of  Tutelage. 

V.  Those,  who  are  by  testament  made  tutors  for  a  term  only, 
are,  at  the  expiration  of  such  term,  discharged  from  the  tutelage. 

Of  the  removal  of  Tutors. 

VI.  They  also  cease  to  be  tutors,  who  are  either  removed  from 
their  office  upon  suspicion,  or  excuse  and  exempt  themselves  from 
the  burden  of  tutelage  for  just  reasons,  of  which  we  shall  treat 
hereafter. 

••-••••  TITLE  XIII. 

OF  CURATORS. 

Of  Adults. 

MALES  arrived  at  puberty,  and  females  marriageable,  do 
nevertheless  receive  curators,  until  they  have  completed  their 
twenty-fifth  year  :  for,  although  they  have  attained  to  puberty ; 
they  are  not  as  yet  of  an  age  to  take  a  proper  care  of  their  own 
affairs. 

By  whom  Curators  are  appointed. 

I.  Curators  are  appointed  by  the  same  magistrates,  who  appoint 
tutors.    A  curator  cannot  be  absolutely  given  by  testament,  but  a 
curator,  named  in  a  testament,  must  be  confirmed  such,  either  by 
a  praetor  or  the  governor  of  a  province. 

To  whom  Curators  are  given. 

II.  No  adults  can  be  obliged  to  receive  curators,  unless adlitem; 
for  a  curator  may  be  appointed  to  any  special  purpose,  or  to  the 
management  of  any  particular  affair. 


40 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  xxm. 


Of  Madmen  and  Prodigals. 

III.  By  a  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  all  madmen  and  prodigals, 
although  of  full  age,  must  nevertheless  be  under  the  curation  of 
of  their  agnati.    But,  if  there  are  no  agnati,  or  if  such,  who  do 
exist,  are  unqualified,  then  curators  are  appointed  ;  at  Rome,  by 
the  prefect  of  the  city,  or  the  praetor ;  and  in  the  provinces,  by 
the  governors,  after  the  requisite  inquiry. 

Of  Impotents. 

IV.  Those,  who  are  deprived  of  their  intellects,  or  deaf,  or 
mute,  or  subject  to  any  continual  disorder,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
unable  to  take  a  proper  care  of  their  own  affairs,  must  be  placed 
under  curators. 

Of  Pupils. 

V.  Sometimes  even  pupils  receive  curators ;  for  instance,  when 
the  legal  tutor  is  unqualified :  for  a  tutor  must  not  be  given  to  him, 
\vho  already  has  a  tutor.    Also,  if  a  testamentary  tutor,  or  a  tutor 
given  by  a  praetor  or  the  governor  of  a  province,  appears   to  be 
afterwards  incapable  of  executing  his  trust,  it  is  usual,  although 
he  is  guilty  of  no  fraud,  to  appoint  a  curator  to  be  joined  with 
him.  It  is  also  usual  to  assign  curators  in  the  place  of  such  tutors 
who  are  not  wholly  excused,  but  excused  for  a  time  only. 

Of  an  Agent  to  the  Curator. 

VI.  If  a  tutor,  by  illness  or  any  other  necessary  impediment, 
should  be  hindered  from  the  personal  execution  of  his  office,  and 
his  pupil  should  be  absent,  or  an  infant,  then  the  praetor  or  the 
governor  of  the  province  shall  decree  any  person,  whom  the  tutor 
approves  of,  to  be  the  pupil's  agent,  for  whose  conduct  the  tutor 
must  be  answerable. 

TITLE  XXIV. 

Of  the  Surety  of  Tutors. 

IT  is  a  branch  of  the  praetor's  office  to  see,  that  tutors  and  ctf* 
rators  give  a  sufficient  caution  for  the  safety  and  indemnification 
of  their  pupils.  But  this  is  not  always  necessary ;  for  a  testa* 
mentary  tutor  is  not  compelled  to  give  caution,  inasmuch  as  his 
fidelity  and  diligence  seem  sufficiently  approved  of  by  the  testa- 
tor. Also  all  tutors,  and  curators,  appointed  to  be  such,  after 
inquiry,  are  supposed  in  every  respect  to  be  qualified,  and  are 
therefore  not  obliged  to  give  security. 

I.  If  two,  or  more,  are  appointed  by  testament,  or  by  a  ma- 
gistrate, after  inquiry,  to  be  tutors  or  curators,  any  one  of  them,. 
by  offering  caution,  may  be  preferred  to  the  sole  administration, 
or  cause  his  co-tutor,  or  co-curator,  to  give  caution,  in  order  to 


B.I.  T.  xxiv.  OF  JUSTINIA  N.  41 


be  admitted  himself  to  the  administration.  Thusjt  appears,  that 
a  man  cannot  demand  security  from  his  co-tutor  or  co-curator; 
but  that,  by  offering  caution  himself,  he  may  compel  his  co-tutor, 
or  co-curator,  to  give  or  receive  caution.  But,  when  no  security  is 
offered,  if  the  testator  hath  appointed  any  particular  person  to 
act,  such  person  must  be  preferred  ;  but,  if  no  particular  person 
is  specified  by  the  testator,  then  must  the  administration  be, com- 
mitted to  such  person  or  persons,  whom  a  majority  of  the  tutors 
shall  elect,  according  to  the  praetorian  edict:  but,  if  they  disagree 
in  their  choice,  the  praetor  may  interpose  his  authority.  ffI(fy$ 
same  rule  is  also  to  be  observed,  when  many,  either  tutorSrOE^u- 
rators,  are  nominated  by  the  magistrate,  viz.  that  a  majority  of 
them  may  appoint  one  of  their  number,  to  whom  the  adminis- 
tration shall  be  committed. 

TT    T    .  •  --iir  Iv^si^i;  ?.;^»ln.  ^opanr^ofn 

II.  It  is  necessary  to  be  known,  that  tutors  and  curators  are 

not  the  only  persons  subject  to  an  action,  on  account  of  the  acU4 
ministration  of  the  affairs  of  pupils,  minors,  and  others under  their 
protection.  For  a  subsidiary  action,  which  is  the  last  remedy  fo 
be  used,  will  also  lie  against  a  magistrate,  either  for  intirely 
omitting  to  take  sureties,'  or  for  taking  such  as 'are  insufficieirt : 
and  this  action,  according  to  the  answers  of  the  lawyers,  as  well 
as  by  the  imperial  constitutions,  is  extended  even  against  tire 
heir  of  any  such  magistrate. 

III.  And  by  the  same  constitutions'  it  is  expressly  enacted,  that 
all  tutors  and  curators,  who  refuse  to  give  caution,  may  be  corti- 
pelled  to  it 

IV.  Neither  the  proefect  of  the  city,  nor 'the  praetor,  nor  the 
governor  of  a  province,  nor  any  other,  who  has  power  to  assign 
tutors,  shall  be  subject  to  a  subsidiary  action :  but  those  friagte-r 
trates  only  are  liable  to  it,  who  exact  the  caution. 


TITLE  XXV. 

OF  EXCUSES  OF  TUTORS  OR  CuRATbi&d 
Of  the  Number  of  Children. 

PERSONS,  who  are  nominated  to  be  either  tutors  or  curators, 
may,  upon  diverse  accounts,  excuse  themselves ;  but  the  most 
general  plea  offered  is  that  of  having  children,  whether  they  are 
subject,  or  emancipated.  For  at  Rome,  if  a  man  has  three  child- 
ren living,  in  Italy  four,  or  in  the  provinces  five,  he  may  there- 
fore be  excused  from  tutelage  and  curation,  as  well  as  from  other 
employments  of  a  public  nature;  for  both  tutelage  and  curaticii 

VOL.  i.  NO.  4.  F 


42  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  i.  T.  xxv. 

are  esteemed  public  offices.  But  adopted  children  will  not  avail 
the  adopter;  they  will  nevertheless  excuse  their  natural  father, 
who  gave  them  in  adoption.  Also  grand-children  by  a  son,  when 
they  succeed  in  the  place  of  their  father,  will  excuse  their  grand- 
father ;  yet  grand-children  by  a  daughter  will  not  excuse  him.  But 
those  children  only,  who  are  living,  can  excuse  from  tutelage  and 
curation  ;  for  the  deceased  are  of  no  service:  and  should  it  now  be 
demanded,  whether  a  parent  can  avail  himself  of  those  sons, 

whom  war  has  destroyed  ?     It  must  be  answered,- that  he  can 

avail  himself  of  those  only,  who  have  perished  in  battle:  for 
those  who  have  fallen  for  the  republic,  are  esteemed  to  live  far 
ever,  in  the  immortality  of  their  fame. 

Of  the  Collectors  of  Taxes. 

I.  The  emperor  Marcus  declared  by  rescript  from  his  Semes- 
trial  council,  that  whoever  is  engaged  in  the  administration  of  af- 
fairs relating  to  the  treasury,  may  be  excused  from  tutelage  and 
curation,  whilst  he  is  so  employed. 

Of  Absence  on  public  Business. 

II.  Those,  who  are  absent  on  the  affairs  of  the  republic,  are 
exempted  from  tutelage  and  curation  ;  and  if  such,  who  are  al- 
ready assigned  to  be  either  tutors  or  curators,  should  afterward^ 
be  absent  on  the  business  of  the  republic,  their  absence  is  dis- 
pensed with,  whilst  they  continue  in  the  public  service;  and  cu- 
rators must  be  appointed  in  their  place  ;  but,  when  such  tutor? 
return,  they  must  then  take  upon  them  the  burden  of  tutelage. 
But  they  are  notintitled  (as  Papinian  asserts  in  the  fifth  book  of 
his  answers)  to  the  privilege  of  a  year's  vacation :  for  that  term  is 
allowed  to  those  only,  who  are  called,  at  their  return,  to  a  new 
tutelage. 

Of  the  greater  Magistrates. 

III.  By  a  rescript  of  the  emperor  Marcust  all  superior  magis- 
trates may,  as  such,  excuse  themselves :  but  they  cannot  desert  a, 
tutelage,  when  once  they  have  undertaken  it. 

Of  a  Lawsuit  with  the  Pupil. 

IV.  No  man  can  excuse  himself  from  taking  the  office  of  a 
tutor  or  curator,  by  alleging  a  lawsuit  with  the  pupil  or  minor, 
unless  the  suit  is  for  all  the  goods,  or  the  whole  inheritance  of 
such  pupil  or  minor. 

Of  three  Tutelages. 

V.  Three  tutelages  or  curatorships,  which  are  not  acquired 
merely  for  advantage,  will  exempt  a  man,  during  their  continu- 
ance, from  the  burden  of  a  fourth.     But  the  tutelage  or  curation 


B.  i.  T.  XXT.  OF  JUSTINIAK.  43 

of  many  pupils,   as  of  three  or  more  brothers,  under  one  patri- 
mony, is  reckoned  only  as  a  single  tutelage  or  curation. 

Of  Poverty. 

VI.  The  divine  brothers  have  declared  by  their  rescript,  and 
the  emperor  Marcus  by  his  separate  rescript,  that  poverty  is  a 
sufficient  excuse,  when  it  can  be  proved  to  be  such,  as  must  ren- 
der a  man  incapable  of  the  burden  imposed  upon  him. 

Of  ill  Health. 

VII.  Illness  also,  if  it  is  so  great  as  to  hinder  a  man  from  trans- 
acting his  own  business,  is  a  sufficient  excuse. 

Of  illiterate  Persons. 

VIII.  By  the  rescript  of  the  emperor  Antoninus  Pius,  illiterate 
persons  are  to  be  excused;    although  in  some  cases  an  illiterate 
man  may  not  be  incapable  of  the  administration. 

Of  the  enmity  of  the  Father. 

IX.  If  a  father  through  enmity  appoints  any  particular  person, 
by  testament,  to  be  tutor  to  his  children,  the  motive  of  such  an 
appointment  will  afford  a  sufficient  excuse.     But  he,  who  by 
promise  hath  engaged  himself  to  a  testator,  is  not  to  be  excused 
from  the  office  of  tutelage. 

Of  ignorance  of  the  Testator. 

X.  The  divine  brothers  have  enacted  by  their  rescript,  that  the 
pretence  of  being  unknown  to  the  father  of  a  pupil  is  not  to  be  ad- 
mitted solely,  as  a  sufficient  excuse. 

Eruptions. 

XL  A  capital  enmity,  against  the  father  of  a  pupil  or  adult, 
will  sufficiently  excuse  any  man,  either  from  tutelage  or  curator* 
ship,  if  no  reconciliation  hath  intervened. 

XII.  Also  he,  whose  condition  hath  been  controverted  at  the 
instance  of  the  father  of  the  pupil,  is  upon  that  account  excused 
from  the  tutelage. 

Of  Age. 

XIII.  Any  person,  who  is  above  seventy  years  of  age,  may  be 
excused  both  from  tutelage  and  curation.     Also  minors,  as  such, 
were  formerly  excusable;  but,  by  our  constitution,  they  are  now 
prohibited  from  aspiring  to  these  trusts ;   and  of  course  all  ex- 
cuses are  become  unnecessary.     It  is  also  enacted  by  the  same  con- 
stitution, that  neither  pupils,  nor  adults,  shall  be  called  even   to  a 
legitime  tutelage.      For  it  is  absurd  that  persons,  who  are  them- 
selves under  governors,  and  known  to  want  assistance  in  the  admi- 
nistration of  their  own  affairs,  should  notwithstanding  this  be 
admitted,  either  as  tutors  or  curators,  to  have  the  management  of 
the  affairs  of  others. 


44  THE  INSTITUTES  n.  i.  T.  xxr. 


Of  Military  Smicc. 

XIV.  Awl  we  must'  also  observe,  that  no  military  person, 
although  willing,  can  be  admitted  to  became  a  tutor  or  curator. 

Of  Grammarians,  Orators,  and  Physicians. 

XV.  Both  at  Ku/w<?'and  in   the  provinces,  all  grammarians, 
feachers  of  rhetoric,  and  physicians,  who  exercise  their  profes- 
sions withrri  their  own  country,  and  are  within  the  number  autho- 
rised, are  exempted  from  tutelage  and  curation. 

Of  the  time  and  manner  of  excuse. 

XVI.  He,  who  can  allege  many  excuses,  and  hath  failed  in  his 
proof  of  those,  which  he  hath  already  given,  is  not  prohibited 
from  assigning  others  within  the  time  prescribed.      But  tutors 
&nd  tHuators  of  whatever  kind,  whether  legal,  testamentary,  or 
dative,  (if  they  afef  willing  to  excuse  themselves)  ought  not  to 
prefer  an  appeal  merely  on  account  of  their  appointment;   but 
they  should  first  exhibit  their  excuses  before  the  proper  magis- 
trate: and  this  they  ought  to  do  within  -fifty  days  after  they  are 
certified  of  their  nomination,  on  supposition,  that  they  are  within 
an  hundred  miles  from  the  place,  where  they  were  nominated. 
But,  if  they  are  at  the  distance  of  more  than  an  hundred  miles, 
they  are  allowed  a  day  for  every  twenty  miles,  and  thirty  days 
besides;  which,  taken  together,  ought  never,  according  isSccevola, 
to  make  a  less  number  of  days  than  5(Vv 

Extent  of  the  office  of  a  Tutor.  ••*'&& 

XVII.  When  a  tutor  is  appointed,  he  is  reputed  to  have  the 
pare  of  the  whole  patrimony  of  his  pupil.    :«<te 

Th&  Tutor  not  required  to  be  Curator. 

XVIII.  He,  who  hath  been  the  tutor  of  a  minor,  can  not  be 
compelled  to  become  his  curator:   and,  by  the  rescript  of  the 
emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus,  although  the  father  of  a  family 
should,  by  testament,  appoint  any  person  to  be  first  the  tutor  of 
his  children,  and  afterwards  their  curator,  if  the  person  so  ap- 
pointed is  unwilling  to  take  upon  him  the  curation,  he  is  by  no 
tneans  compellable. 

Of  Husland*. 

XIX.  The  same  emperors  have  likewise,  by  their  rescript, 
enacted,  that  an  husband  may  excuse  himself  from  being  a  cura- 
tor to  his  wife,  even  after  he  hath  begun  to  act. 

Of  false  Allegations . 

XX.  If  any  man  should,  by  false  allegations,  have  appeared  to 
inerit  a  dismission  from  the  cilice  of  tutelage,  he  is  not  therefore 
freed  from  the  burden  of  this  office. 


B.  i.  T.  xxvi.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


TITLE  XXVI. 

OF  SUSPECTED  TUTORS  AND  CURATORS. 
THE  accusation  of  a  suspected  tutor,  or  curator,  is  derived 
from  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables. 

The  Cognizance  belongs  to  the  Prcetor. 

I.  At  Rome  the  power  of  removing  suspected  tutors  belongs  to 
the  praetor,  and  in  the  provinces  to  the  governors,  or  to  the  legate 
of  a  proconsul. 

Who  may  be  suspected. 

II.  We  have  already  shewed,  what  magistrates  may  take  cogni- 
zance of  suspected  persons:  let  us  now  therefore  inquire,  what 
persons  may  become  suspected.     And  indeed  all  tutors  may  be- 
come so,  whether  they  are  testamentary,  or  of  any  other  denomi- 
nation.    For  even  a  legitime  tutor  may  be  accused  ;  neither  is  a 
patron  less  subject  to  an  accusation  ;  but  we  must  remember,  that, 
as  such,  his  reputation  must  be  spared  although  he  is  removed 
from  his  trust,  as  a  suspected  person. 

"    ';/  »"  .-•>••*>   '.it  :      :  V-          .  '*•  *  x    .  '*•"-'  J  J*     '  .  % ;    ji 

Who  may  accuse  Tutors. 

III.  It  now  remains,  as  a  consequence,  that  we  inquire,  by  whom 
suspected  persons  may  be  accused.     It  must  therefore  be  known, 
that  an  accusation  of  this  sort  is  of  a  public  nature,  and  open  to 
all.     For,  by  a  rescript  of  the  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus, 
even  women  are  admitted  to  be  accusers;  yet  such  only,  who  are 
induced  to  it  by  their  duty,  or  by  their  relation  to  the  minor:  thus 
a  mother,  a  nurse,  or  a  grand-mother,  may  become  accusers;  arid 
also  a  sister.     But  the  praetor  can  at  discertion  admit  any  women, 
who  acting  with  a  becoming  modesty,  but  impatient  of  wrongs 
offered  to  pupils,  appears  to  have  no  other  motive  than  to  relieve 
the  injured. 

Adults  may  accuse  their  Curators. 

IV.  No  pupil  can  bring  an  accusation  of  suspicion  against  his 
tutor:  but  adults,  by  the  rescript  of  Severus  and  Antoninus,  are 
permitted,  when  they  act  by  advice  of  persons  related  to  them, 
to  accuse  their  curators. 

Who  may  be  suspected. 

V.  Any  tutor,  who  -does  not  faithfully  execute  his  trust,  let  his 
circumstances  be  ever  so  sufficient  to  answer  damages,  may,  ac- 
cording to  Julian,  be  pronounced  suspected.     And  it  is  also  the 
opinion  of  the  same  Julian,  (which  opinion  is  adhered  to  in  our 
constitutions,)  that  a  tutor  may  be  removed  from  his  office,  as 
suspected,  even  before  he  has  begun  to  execute  it. 


46  THE  INSTITUTES,  &c.  B.  i.  T.  xxri. 

Of  the  effect  of  Removal. 

VI.  When  any  person  is  removed  upon  suspicion,  if  it  is  of 
fraud,  he  is  stigmatized  with  infamy  ;  but,  if  of  neglect  only  he 

does  not  become  infamous. 

Of  the  effect  of  Accusation. 

VII.  If  any  tutor  is  accused  upon  suspicion,  his  administration, 
according  to  Papinian,  is  suspended,  whilst  the  accusation  is  un- 
der cognizance. 

'How  the  Action  is  finished. 

VIII.  If  a  suspected  tutor  or  curator  should  die,  pending  the 
accusation,  then  the  cognizance  of  it  is  extinguished. 

If  the  Tutor  fails  of  Appearance. 

IX.  If  a  tutor  fails  to  appear,  with  an  intent  to  defer  the  ap- 
pointment of  an  allowance  for  the  maintenance  of  his  pupil,  it  is 
provided  by  the  constitution  of  Severus  and  Antoninus,  that  the 
pupil  shall  be  put  into  the  possession  of  his  tutor's  effects;  and 
that,  a  curator  being  appointed,  those  things,  which  will  be  impair^ 
edby  delay,  may  be  immediately  put  to  sale:  and  therefore  any 
tufor,  who,  by  absenting  himself,  impedes  the  grant  of  an  allow- 
ance to  his  pupil,  may  be  removed,  as  suspected. 

X.  But  if  a  tutor  makes  a  personal  appearance,  and  falsely 
avers,  that  the  effects  of  his  pupil  are  insufficient  for  an  allowance, 
such  tutor  shall  be  remitted  to  the  praefect  of  the  cit}^  and  pu- 
nished by  him  in  the  same  manner,  as  he,  who  hath  acquired  a 
tutelage  by  bribery. 

Of  fraudulent  Administration. 

XL    Also  a  freed-man,  who  is  proved  to  have  fraudulently 
administred  the  tutelage  of  the  son,  or  grandson  of  his  patron, 
must  be  remitted  to  the  praefect  to  be  condignly  punished. 
Surety  no  excuse  for  a  suspected  Tutor. 

XII.  It  is  lastly  to  be  observed,  that  they,  who  unfaithfully 
administer  their  trust,  must  be  immediately  removed  from  it, 
although  they  tender  a  sufficient  caution.  For  the  act  of  giving 
caution  alters  not  the  malevolent  purpose  of  the  tutor,  but  pro- 
c,ures  him  a  longer  time  for  the  continuance  of  his  depredations, 
We  also  deem  every  man  suspected,  whose  immoralities  give 
cause  for  it:  but  a  tutor  or  curator,  who,  although  poor,  is  yet 
faithful  and  diligent,  can  by  no  means  be  removed,  as  a  suspected 
person,  merely  on  account  of  poverty. 


THE 

INSTITUTIONS 

OR 

ELEMENTS  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


TITLE  I. 
OF  THE  DIVISION  OF  THINGS. 

Twofold  Division  of  Things. 

WE  have  already  treated  of  persons  in  the  foregoing  book ;  let 
us  now  therefore  inquire  concerning  things,  which  may  be  divided 
into  those,  which  can,  and  those,  which  can  not  come  within  our 
patrimony  and  be  acquired ;  for  some  things  are  in  common 
among  mankind  in  general ; some  are  public  ; some  univer- 
sal;  and  some  are  such,  to  which  no  man  can  have  a  right. 

But  most  things  are  the  private  property  of  individuals,  by  whom 
they  are  variously  acquired,  as  will  appear  hereafter. 

Of  the  Air,  running  Water,  the  Sea,  and  the  Shore. 

I.  Those  things,  which  are  given  to  mankind  in  common  by 
the  law  of  nature,  are  the  air,  running  water,  the  sea,  and  conse- 
quently the  shores  of  the  sea:   no  man  therefore  is  prohibited 
from  approaching  any  part  of  the  sea-shore,  whilst  he  abstains 
from  committing  acts  of  violence  in  destroying  farms,  monuments, 
edifices,  &c.  which  are  not  in  common,  as  the  sea  is. 

Of  Rivers  and  Harbours. 

II.  All  rivers  and  ports  are  public;   and  therefore  the  right  of 
fishing  in  a  port,  or  in  rivers,  is  in  common. 

Definition  qf  the  Shore. 

III.  All  that  tract  of  land,  over  which  the  greatest  winter 
flood  extends  itself,  is  the  sea-shore. 

Of  the  Use  and  Property  of  Banks. 

IV.  By  the  law  of  nations  the  use  of  the  banks  of  rivers  is  also 
public,  as  the  rivers  themselves  are ;  and  therefore  all  persons  have 
the  same  liberty  to  bring  their  vessels  to  the  land,  to  unload  them, 
and  to  fasten  ropes  to  trees  upon  the  banks  of  a  river,  as  they 


48  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T,  i. 

have  to  navigate  upon  the  river  itself:  but,  notwithstanding  this, 
the  banks  of  a  river  are  the  property  of  those,  who  possess  the 
land,  adjoining  to  such  banks;    and  therefore  the  trees,  which 
grow  upon  them,  are  also  the  property  of  the  same  persons. 
Of  the  Use  and  Property  of  the  Sea-shore. 

V.  The  use  of  the  sea-shore  is  also  public  and  common  by  the 
law  of  nations,  as  is  the  use  of  the  sea;   arid  therefore  any  person 
is  permitted  to  erect  a  cottage  upon  it  for  his  habitation,  in  which 
be  may  dry  his  nets,  and  preserve  them  from  the  water;  for  the 
shores  are  not  understood  to  be  a  property  in  any  man,  but  are 
compared  to  the  sea  itself,  and  to  the  .sand  or  ground,  which  is 
under  the  sea. 

Of  Things  which  are  universal. 

VI.  Theatres,  ground  appropriated  for  a  race  or  public  exer- 
cises, and  things  of  the  like  nature,  which  belong  to  a  whole  city, 
are  universal,  and  not  the  property  of  any  particular  person. 

Of  Things  which  belong  to  no  one. 

VII.  Things  sacred,  religious,  and  holy,  cannot  be  vested  in 
any  person,  as  his  own  :  for  that,  which  is  of  divine  right,  is  nul* 
lius  in  bonist  and  can  be  no  man's  property. 

•  Of  sacred  Things. 

VIII.  Those  things,  which  have  been  consecrated  by  the  pon- 
tiffs in  due  form,  are  esteemed  sacred ;  such  are  churches,  chapels, 
and  also  all  moveable  things,  if  they  have  been  properly  dedicated 
to  the  service  of  God :  and  we  have  forbidden  by  our  constitution, 
that  these  things  should  be  either  aliened  or  obligated,  unlessvfor 
the  redemption  of  captives.     But,  if  a  man  should  consecrate  a 
building  merely  by  his  own  authority,  it  would  not  be  rendered 
sacred  by  such  a  consecration;   but  the  very  ground,  upon  which 
a  sacred  edifice  hath  once  been  erected,  will,  according  to  Papi- 
niant  continue  to  be  sacred,  although  the  edifice  is  destroyed. 

Of  religious  Things. 

IX.  Any  man  may  at  his  will  render  any  place,  which  belongs 
solely  to  himself,  religious,  by  making  it  the  repository  of  a  dead 
body ;   yet,  when  two  are  joint  possessors  of  a  place  or  spot  of 
ground,  not  before  used  for  such  a  purpose,  it  is  not  in  the  power 
of  the  one,  without  the  consent  of  the  other,  to  cause  it  to  become 
religious.     But,  when  there  is  a  sepulchre  in  common  among 
many,  it  is  in  the  power  of  any  one  joint-possessor  to  make  use  of 
it,  although  the  rest  should  dissent.     And,  when  there  is  a  pro- 
prietor, and  an  usufructuary,  of  the  same  place,   the  proprietor, 
without  the  consent  of  the  usufructuary,  can  not  render  it  religious. 


B.  ii.  T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  4<> 

But  it  is  lawful  to  lay  the  body  of  a  dead  person  in  a  place, 
belonging  to  any  man,  who  has  given  his  consent  to  it ;  and, 
although  he  should  dissent  after  the  burial,  yet  the  place  becomes 
religious. 

Of  holy  Things. 

X.  Holy  things  also,  as  the  walls  and  gates  of  a  city,  are  if* 
some  degree  of  divine  right,  and  therefore  the  property  of  no  man. 
The  walls  of  a  city  are  esteemed  sancti  or  holy,  inasmuch  as  any 
offence  against  them  is  always  punished  capitally;  and  therefore 
all  those  parts  of  the  laws,  by  which  punishments  are  inflicted 
upon  transgressors,  we  generally  term  sanctions. 
Of  private  Property. 

XL  There  are  various  means,  by  which  things  become  the 
property  of  private  persons.  Of  some  things  we  obtain  dominion 
aud  property  by  the  law  of  nature,  which  (as  we  have  already 
observed)  is  also  called  the  law  of  nations:  and  we  acquire  a 
property  in  other  things  by  the  civil  law.  But  it  will  be  most 
convenient  to  begin  from  the  more  antient  law :  and  that  the  law, 
which  nature  established  at  the  birth  of  mankind,  is  the  most  an- 
tient, appears  evident :  for  civil  laws  could  then  only  commence 
to  exist,  when  cities  began  to  be  built,  magistracies  to  be  created, 
and  laws  to  be  written. 

Of  the  occupation  of  the  Ferce  Naturae. 

XII.  Wild  beasts,  birds,  fish,  and  all  the  animals,  which  are 
bred  either  in  the  sea,  the  air,  or  upon  the  earth,  do,  as  soon  as 
they  are  taken,  become  instantly,  by  the  law  of  nations,  the  pro- 
perty of  the  captor:  for  it  is  agreeable  to  natural  reason,  that  those 
things,  which  have  no  owner,  should  become  the  property  of  the 
first  occupant :  and  it  is  not  material,  whether  they  then  are  taken 
by  a  man  upon  his  own  ground,  or  upon  the  ground  of  another: 
but  yet  it  is  certain,  that  whoever  hath  entered  into  the  ground  of 
another  for  the  sake  of  hunting  or  fowling,  might  have  been  pro- 
hibited from  entering  by  the  proprietor  of  the  ground,  if  he  had 
foreseen  the  intent.  But,  though  wild  beasts,  or  fowl,  when  taken, 
are  esteemed  to  be  the  property  of  the  captor,  whilst  they  conti- 
nue in  his  custody,  yet,  when  they  have  once  escaped  and  reco- 
vered their  natural  liberty,  the  right  of  the  captor  ceases,  and 
they  become  the  property  of  the  first,  who  seizes  them.  And 
they  are  understood  to  have  recovered  their  natural  liberty,  if  they 
have  run  or  flown  out  of  sight ;  and  even  if  they  are  not  out  of 
sight,  when  it  so  happens,  that  they  can  not  without  difficulty  bs 
pursued  and  retaken. 

VOL.  I.  No.  4.  G 


50  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  •*.  i. 


Of  hunted  Beasts. 

XTII.  It  bath  been  a  question,  whether  a  wild  beast  is  under- 
Stood  to  belong  to  him,  by  whom  it  hath  been  so  wounded,  that 
it  may  easily  be  taken.  And,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  it  belongs 
to  such  person,  as  long  as  he  pursues  it ;  but,  if  he  quits  the  pur- 
suit, they  say  it  ceases  to  be  his,  and  again  becomes  the  right 
of  tin-  first  occupant.  ^But  others  have  thought,  that  property  in 
a  wild  beast  can  not  otherwise  be  obtained,  than  by  actually  tak- 
ing it  '  And  we  confirm  this  latter  opinion,  because  many  acci- 
dents frequently  happen,  which  prevent  the  capture. 

Of  Bees. 

XIV.  Bees  also  are  wild  by  nature ;  and  therefore,  although  they 
swarm  upon  a  tree,  which  is  yours,  they  are  not  reputed,  until 
they  are  hived  by  you,  to  be  more  your  property,  than  the  birds, 
which  have  nests  there;  and  therefore,  if  any  other  person  shall 
inclose  them  in  a  hive,  he  thus  becomes  their  proprietor.    Their 
honeycombs  also  become  the  property  of  him,  who  takes  them: 
tut,  if  you  observe  any  person  entering  into  your  ground,  with 
that  intent,  you  may  justly  hinder  him.     A  swarm,  which  hath 
flown  from  your  hive,  is  still  reputed  to  continue  yours,  as  long  at 
it  remains  in  sight,  and  may  easily  be  pursued  ;  but,  in  any  other 
case,  it  will  become  the  property  of  the  occupant. 

Of  Peacocks,  Pigeons,  and  tamed  Animals. 

XV.  Peacocks  and  Pigeons  are  also  naturally  wild ;  nor  is  it 
any  objection  to  say,  that,  after  every  flight,  it  is  their  custom  to 
return:  for  bees  do  the  same  thing  ;  and,  that  bees  are  naturally 
wild,  is  evident.     Some  have  been  known  to  have  trained  deer  to 
be  so  tame,  that  they  would  go  into,  and  return  from  the  woods, 
at  regular  periods :  and  yet  no  man  denies,  but  that  deer  are  wild 
by  nature.    But,  with  respect  to  these  animals,  which  go  and  re^ 
turn  customarily,  the  rule  to  be  observed  is,  that  they  are  under- 
stood to  be  yours,  as  long  as  they  appear  to  retain  an  inclination 
to  return ;  but,  if  this  inclination  ceases,  that  they  cease  to  be 
yours ;  and  will  again  become  the  property  of  him,  who  takes  them. 
And  these  amimals  seem  then  to  cease  to  have  an  inclination  tQ 
return,  when  they  disuse  the  custoip  of  returning. 

Of  Geese  and  Fowls. 

XVI.  But  geese,  and  fowls,  are  not  wild  by  nature ;  and  thi* 
we  are  induced  to  observe,  because  there  is  a  species  of  fowls,  and 
a  species  of  geese,  which  in  contradistinction  we  term  wild  :  am} 
therefore,  if  the  geese,  or  fowls  of  Titius,  being  disturbed  an4 
frightened,  should  take  flight,  they  are  nevertheless  reckoned  tQ 


B.  ir.  T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  51 

belong  to  him,  in  whatever  place  they  are  found,  although  he  shall 
have  lost  sight  of  them:  and  whoever  detains  such  animals,  with 
a  lucrative  view,  is  understood  to  commit  a  theft. 
Of  Occupation  in  War. 

XVII.  All  those  things,  which  we  take  from  our  enemies  in  war, 
become  instantly  our  own  by  the  law  of  nations:  so  that  free-meu 
may  be  brought  into  a  state  of  servitude  by  capture:  but,  if  they 
afterwards  escape,  and  shall  have  returned  to  their  own  people, 
they  then  obtain  again  their  former  state. 

Of  Wrecks. 

XVIII.  Precious  stones,  pearls,  and  o^her  things,  which  are 
found  upon  the  sea-shore,  become  instantly,  by  the  law  of  nations, 
the  property  of  the  finder. 

Of  the  product  of  Animals. 

XIX.  The  product  of  those  animals,  of  which  we  are  the  owners 
and  masters,  is,  by  the  same  law,  esteemed  to  be  our  own. 

Of  Alluvion. 

XX.  And  farther — that  ground,  which  a  river  hath  added  to 
your  estate  by  alluvion,  [i.  e.  by  an  imperceptible  increase,]  is 
properly  acquired  by  you  according  to  the  law  of  nations.     And 
that  is  said  to  be  added  by  alluvion,  which  is  added  in  a  manner, 
which  renders  it  impossible  to  judge,  how  much  ground  is  added 
in  the  space  of  each  moment  of  time. 

Of  the  effect  of  Floods. 

XXL  But,  if  the  impetuosity  of  a  river  should  sever  any  part 
of  your  estate,  and  adjoin  it  to  that  of  your  neighbour,  it  is  certain, 
that  such  part  would  still  continue  yours ;  but,  if  it  should  remain, 
for  a  long  time,  joined  to  the  estate  of  your  neighbour,  and  the 
trees,  which  accompanied  it,  shall  have  taken  root  in  his  ground, 
such  trees  seem,  from  the  time  of  their  taking  root,  to  be  gained 
and  acquired  to  his  estate. 

Of  Islands. 

XXII.  "When  an  island  rises  in  the  sea,  (an  event  which  rarely 
happens)  the  property  of  it  is  in  the  occupant  ;  for  the  property, 
before  occupation,  is  in  no  man.  But,  if  an  island  rises  in  a  river, 
(which  frequently  happens)  and  is  placed  exactly  in  the  middle 
of  it,  such  island  shall  be  in  common  to  them,  who  posses  the  lands 
near  the  banks  on  each  side  of  the  river,  according  to  the  propor- 
tion of  the  extent  and  latitude  of  each  man's  estate,  adjoining  to 
the  banks.  But,  if  the  island  is  nearer  to  one  side,  than  the  other, 
it  belongs  to  them  only,  who  possess  lands  next  to  the  banks  on 
that  side,  to  which  the  island  is  nearest.  But,  if  a  river  divides 


M  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  r.  i. 

itself  and  afterwards  unites  again,  having  reduced  a  tract  of  land 
into  the  form  of  an  island,  the  land  still  continues  to  be  the  pro- 
perty of  him,  to  whom  it  before  appertained. 

Of  Rivers. 

XXIII.  If  a  river,  entirley  forsaking  its  natural  channel,  hath 
began  to  flow  elsewhere,  the  first  channel  appertains  to  those, 
who  possess  the  lands,  close  to  the  banks  of  it,  in  proportion  to  the 
breadth  of  each  man's  estate  next  to  such  banks  :  and  the  new 
channel  partakes  of  the  nature  of  the  river,  and  becomes  public. 
And,  if  after  some  time  the  river  shall  return  to  its  former  channel, 
the  new  channel  commences  to  be  the  property  of  those,  who 
possess  the  lands,  contiguous  to  the  banks  of  it. 

Of  Inundation. 

XXIV.  But  it  is  otherwise  in  respect  to  lands,  which  are  over- 
flowed only;  for  an  inundation  alters  not  the  face  and  nature  of 
the  earth  ;  and  therefore,  when  the  waters  have  receded,  it  is  ap- 
parent, that  the  property  will  be  found  still  to  remain  in  him,  in 
whom  it  was  vested  before  the  inundation* 

Of  Specification. 

XXV.  When  a  man  hath  made  any  species,  or  kind  of  work,  with 
materials,  belonging  to  another,  it  is  often  demanded,  which  of 
them  ought,  in  natural  reason,  to   be  deemed  the  master  of  it ; 

whether  he,  who  made  the  species,  or  he  who  was  the  urn 

doubted  owner  of  the  materials  ?  as,  for  instance,   if  any  person 
should  make  wine,  oil,  or  flour,  from  the  grapes,  olives,  or  com 

of  another, should  cast  a  vessel  out  of  gold,  silver,  or  brass, 

belonging  to  another  man, should  make  a  liquor,  called  mulse, 

with  the  wine  and  honey  of  another, should  compose  a  plaster 

or  collyrium,   with  another  man's  medicines, should  make  a 

garment  with  another's  wool, or  should  fabricate,  with  the 

timber  of  another,   a  bench,  a  ship,   or  a  chest? And  after 

much  controversy  concerning  this  question,  between  the  Sabinians 
and  Proculians,  the  opinion  of  those  who  kept  a  mean  between 
the  two  parties,  proved  most  satisfactory  to  us:  and  their  opinion 

was  this : that,  if  the  species  can  be  reduced  to  its  former,  rude 

materials,  then  the  owner  of  such  materials  is  also  to  be  reckoned 
the  owner  of  the  new  species:  but,  if  the  species  can  not  be  so 
reduced,  then  he  who  made  it,  is  understood  to  be  the  owner  of 
it:   for  example;    a  vessel  can  easily  be  reduced  to  the  rude 
mass  of  brass,  silver,  or  gold,  of  which  it  was  made;  but  wine, 
oil,  or  flour,  can  not  be  converted  into  grapes,  olives,  or  corn; 
weither  can  muke  be  resolved  and  separated  into  wine  and  honey. 


B.  ii.  T.  i. OF  JUSTINIAN. 63 

But,  if  a  man  makes  any  species,  partly  with  his  own  materials, 
and  partly  with  the  materials  of  another :  as,  for  instance,  if  he 
should  make  mulse  with  his  own  wine,  and  another's  honey  ;  or 
a  plaster,  or  eye-water,  partly  with  his  own,  and  partly  with  an- 
other man's  medicines  ;  or  should  make  a  garment  with  an  inter- 
mixture of  his  own  wool  with  the  wool  of  another,- it  is  not 

to  be  doubted,  in  all  such  cases,  but  that  he  who  made  the  species, 
is  master  of  it;  since  he  not  only  gave  his  labour,  but  furnished 
also  a  part  of  the  materials. 

Of  Accession. 

XXVI.  If  any  man  shall  have  interwoven  the  purple  of  another 
into  his  own  vestment,  then  the  purple,  although  it  may  be  more 
valuable,  doth  yield  and  appertain  to  the  vestment  by  accession  ; 
and  he,  who  was  the  owner  of  the  purple,  may  have  an  action  of 
theft,  and  a  personal  action,  called  a  condiction,  against  the  pur- 
Joiner;   nor  is  it  of  any  consequence,  whether  the  vestment  wa» 
made  by  him,  who  committed  the  theft,  or  by  another:  for  al- 
though things,  which  become,  as  it  were,  extinct  by  the  change  of 
their  form,  can  not  be  recovered  identically,  yet  a  condiction  may  be 
brought  for  the  recovery  of  the  value  of  them,  either  against  the 
thief,  or  against  any  other  possessor. 

Of  Confusion. 

XXVII.  If  the  materials  of  two  persons  are  incorporated  together, 
then  the  whole  mass,  or  composition,  is  common  to  both  the  pro- 
prietors :  for  instance,  if  two  owners  shall  have  intermixed  their 
wines,  or  shall  have  melted  together  their  gold  or  their  silver. 
The  same  rule  is  also  observed,  if  diverse  substances  are  so  incor- 
porated, as  to  become  one  species :  as  when  mulse  is  made  with 
•wine  and  honey  ;  or  when  an  electrum  is  composedly  an  inter- 
mixture of  gold  and  silver  in  different  proportions :  for  in  these 
cases  it  is  not  doubted,  but   that  the  species   becomes  common. 
Neither  is  any  other  rule  observed,  when  either  homogeneous,  or 
even  different  substances,  are  confounded  and  incorporated  to- 
gether fortuitously,  without  the  consent  of  their  proprietors. 

Of  Commixion. 

XXVIII.  If  the  corn  of  Titius  hath  been  mixed  with  the  corn  of 
another  by  consent,  then  the  whole  is  in  common ;  because  the 
single  bodies,  or  grains,  which  were  the  private  property  of  each, 
are,  by  the  mutual  consent,  made  common.     But  if  the  inter- 
mixture was  accidental,  or  if  Titius  made  it  without  consent,  it 
then  seems,  that  the  corn  is  not  in  common  ;  because  the  single 
grains  still  remain  ununited,  and   in  their  proper  substance :  for 


M  THE  INSTITUTES B.  n.  T.  i, 

corn,  in  such  a  case,  is  no  more  understood  to  be  in  common,  than 
a  flock  would  be,  if  the  sheep  of  Titius should  accidentally  inter- 
mix with  the  sheep  of  another.  But,  if  the  whole  quantity  of 
corn  should  be  retained  by  either  of  the  parties,  then  an  action  in 
rem  lies  for  the  quantity  of  each  man's  corn  :  and  it  is  the  busi- 
ness and  duty  of  the  judge  to  make  an  exact  estimate  of  the  qua- 
lity, or  value,  of  the  corn,  belonging  to  each  party. 
Of  what  adheres  to  the  Soil. 

XXIX.  When  any  man  hath  raised  a  building  upon  his  owrr 
ground,  he  is  understood  to  be  the  proprietor  of  such  building,  al- 
though the  materials  used  in  it  were  the  property  of  another : 
for  every  building  is  an  accession  to  the  ground,  upon  which  it 
stands.     But,  notwithstanding  this,  he,  who  was  the  owner  of 
the  materials,  does  not  cease  to  be  the  owner ;  yet  he  cannot  de- 
mand his  materials,  or  bring  an  action  for  the  exhibition  of  them  ; 
for  it  is  provided,  by  a  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  that  a  person, 
whose  house  is  built  with  the  materials  of  another,  cannot  be 
compelled  to  restore  those  materials ;  but  by  an  action,  intitled 
de  tignojuncto,  he  may  be  obliged  to  pay  double  the  value  :  and 
here  note,  that  all  the  materials  for  building  are  comprehended 
under  the  general  term  tignum.     The  above  cited  provision,  in 
the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  was  mdde  to  prevent  the  demolition 
of  buildings.     But,  if  it  happens  that,  by  any  cause,  a  building 
»hould  be  dissevered,  or  pulled  down,  then  the  owner  of  the  ma- 
terials, if  he  hath  not  already  obtained  double  the  value  of  them, 
is  not  prohibited  to  claim  his  identical  materials,  and  to  bring  hi* 
action  ad  exhibendum. 

Of  building  with  your  Materials  on  the  Ground  of  another. 

XXX.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  man  shall  have  built  an  edifice  with 
his  own  materials,  upon  the  ground  of  another,  such  edifice  be- 
comes the  property  of  him,  to  whom  the  ground  appertains  ;  for, 
in  this  case,  the  owner  of  the  materials  loses  his  property,  because 
he  is  understood  to  have  made  a  voluntary  alienation  of  it :   and 
this  is  the  law,  if  he  was  not  ignorant  that  he  was  building  upon 
another's  land  :  and  therefore,  if  the  edifice  should  fall,   or  be 
pulled  duwn,  such  person  can  even  then  have  no  claim  to  the 
materials.     But  it  is  apparent,  if  the  proprietor  of  the  ground,  of 
which  the  builder  was  in  confirmed  possession,  should  plead,  that 
the  edifice  is  his,  and  refuse  to  pay  the  price  of  the  materials,  and 
the  wages  of  the  workmen,  that  then  such  proprietor  may  be  re* 
pelled  by  an  exception  of  fraud:  and  this  may  assuredly  be  done, 
if  the  builder  was  the  possessor  of  the  ground  bonajide.    But  it 


».  ii.  T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  55 


tnay  be  justly  objected  to  any  man,  who  understood  that  the  land 
appertained  to  another,  "  that  he  had  built  rashly  upon  that 
ground,  which  he  knew  to  be  the  property  of  another." 

Of  Planting. 

XXXI.  If  Titius  sets  another  man's  plant  in  his  own  ground, 
the  plant  will  become  the  property  of  Titius :  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, if  Titius  shall  have  set  his  own  plant  in  Mcmius's  ground, 
the  plant  will  appertain  to  Mcevius;  on  supposition  iReither  case, 
that  it  hath  already  taken  root;  for,  until  then,  the  property  of 
the  plant  remains  still  in  him,  by  whom  it  was  planted.     But  from 
the  instant  in  which  a  plant  hath  taken  root,  the  property  of  it  is 
changed  :  so  that,  if  the  tree  of  a  neighbour  borders  so  closely 
upon  the  ground  of  Titiiis  as  to  take  root  in  it,  and  be  wholly 
nourished  there,    we  may  affirm,  that  tree  is  become  the  pro- 
perty of  Titius:  for  reason  doth  not  permit,  that  such  a  tree  should 
be  deemed  the  property  of  any  other,  than  of  him,  in  whose 
ground  it  hath  cast  its  roots:  and  therefore,  if  a  tree,  planted  near 
the  bounds  of  the  lands  of  one  person,  shall  also  extend  its  roots 
into  the  lands  of  another,  such  tree  will  become  common  to  both 
the  land  proprietors. 

Of  Sowing. 

XXXII.  As  all  plants  are  esteemed  to  appertain  to  the  soil,  in 
•which  they  have  rooted,  so  every  kind  of  grain  is  also  understood 
to  follow  the  property  of  that  ground,  in  which  it  is  sowed.  But 
as  he  who  hath  built  upon  the  ground  of  another,  may  (according 
to  what  we  have  already  said)  be  defended  by  an  exception  of 

fraud,  if  the  proprietor  of  the  ground  shall  demand  the  edifice ; 
so  he,  who  at  his  own  expence  and  bonajide  hath  sowed  in  an- 
other man's  land,  may  also  be  benefited  by  the  help  of  this 

exception. 

Of  Writing. 

XXXIII.  As  whatever  is  built  upon,  or  sowed  in  the  ground, 
belongs  to  that  ground  by  accession  ;  so  letters  also,  although 
written  with  gold,   appertain  to  the  paper  or  parchment  upon 
which  they  are  written.     And  therefore,  if  Titius  shall  have  writ- 
ten a  poem,  an  history,  or  an  oration,  upon  the  paper  or  parch- 
ment of  Seius,  then  Titius  will  not  be  deemed  the  master  of  his 
own  work,  but  the  whole  will  be  reputed  to  be  Seius'f  property. 
But  if  Seius  demands  his  books  or  parchments  from  Titius,  and 
at  the  same  time  refuses  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  writing, 
then  Titius  can  defend  himself  by  an  exception  of  fraud  :  and  this 
he  may  certainly  do,  if  he  was  in  possession  of  such  papers  and 
parchments  bonajide;  that  is,  honestly,  and  believing  them  to  be 
ftis  own. 


56  THE  INSTITUTES B.  ti.  *.  i. 

Of  Pictures. 

XXXIV.  If  any  man  shall  have  painted  upon  the  tablet  of  ano- 
ther, some  think,  that  the  tablet  should  yield  and  accede  to  the 
picture:  but  it  is  the  opinion  of  others,  that  the  picture  (what- 
ever the  quality  of  it  may  be)  should  accede  to  the  tablet.     But 
it  appears  to  us  to  be  the  better  opinion,  that  the  tablet  should 
accede  to  the  picture;  for  it  seems  ridiculous,   that  the  painting 
of  an  Appcllcs,  or  a  Parrhasius,  should  yield,  as  an  accession,  to 
a  worthless  tablet.     But  if  he,  who  hath  painted  upon  a  tablet, 
demands  it  from  the  owner  and  possessor,  and  offers  not  the  price 
of  it,  then  such  demandant  may  be  defeated  by  an  exception  of 

fraud  :  but,  if  the  painter  is  in  possession  of  the  picture,  the  owner 
of  the  tablet  is  intitled  to  an  action  called  utilis,  i.  e.  beneficial  : 
in  which  case,  if  the  owner  of  the  tablet  demands  it,  and  does  not 
tender  the  value  of  the  picture,  he  may  also  be  repelled  by  an 
exception  of  fraud,  if  he,  who  hath  painted  upon  the  tablet,  was 
the  possessor  of  it  upon  good  faith.  But,  if  he,  who  hath  painted 
upon  it,  or  any  other,  shall  have  taken  way  a  tablet  feloniously,  it 
is  evident,  that  the  owner  of  it  may  prosecute  such  person  by  an 
action  of  theft. 

Of  Fruits  reaped  in  error. 

XXXV.  If  any  man  shall  have  purchased  lands  from  another* 
believing  the  seller  to  have  been  the  true  owner,  when  in  fact  he 
was  not,  or  shall  have  obtained  an  estate  bonafide,  either  by  dona- 
tion, or  any  other  just  means,  it   is  agreeable  to  natural  reason, 
that  the  fruits,  which  he  shall  have  gathered,  shall  be  reckoned 
to  have  become  his  own,  on  account  of  his  care  in   the  culture 
and  tillage:  and  therefore,  if  the  true  owner  shall  afterwards  ap- 
pear and  claim  his  lands,  he  can  have  no  action  against  the  bona 
fide  possessor,  for  those  fruits  and  that  product,  which  have  been 
consumed.  But  this  exemption  from  such  an  action  is  not  granted 
to  him,  who  knowingly  keeps  possession  of  another's  estate  ;  and 
therefore,  when  ever  there  is  a  mala  fides,  the  possessor  is  com- 
pellable  to  restore  all  the  mesne  profits  together  with  the  lands. 

Of  the  Usufructuary. 

XXXVI.  He,  to  whom  the  usufruct  of  lands  belongs,  can  gain  no 
property  in  the  fruits  ofsuch  lands,  until  he  hath  actually  gathered 
them;  and  therefore,  if  the  usufructuary  should  die,  whilst  the 
fruits,  although  ripe,  are  yet  ungathered,  they  could  not  be  claimed 
by  his  heirs,  but  would  be  acquired  by  the  proprietor  of  the  lands; 
and  the  same  may  be  said  in  general,  in  relation  to  farmers. 


B.  ii.  T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  57 


What  are  fruits. 

XXXVII.  In  estimating  the  product  of  animals,  we  not  only 
reckon  milk,  skins,  and  wool,  but  also  their  young  :  and,  there- 
fore  lambs,  kids,  calves,  colts,  and  pigs,  appertain -by  natural  right 
to  the  usufructuary  ;  but  the  offspring  of  a  female  slave  is  not  to 
be  included  within  this  product  ;  and  can  belong  to  him  only,  in 
whom  the  property  of  such  female  slave  is  vested  :  for  it  seemed 
absurd  to  think,  that  man,  for  whom  nature  hath  framed  all  things, 
should  be  enumerated  among  the  productions  of  the  brute  creation. 

Of  the  duty   of  the  Usufructuary. 

XXXVIII.  He,  who  has  the  usufruct  of  a  flock,  ought  (ac- 
cording to  the  opinion  of  Julian}  to  preserve  the  original  number 
of  his  sheep  intire,  by  supplying  the  place  of  those,  which  die, 
out  of  the  produce  of  the  flock  :  and  the  duty  of  a  usufructuary 
is  the  same  in  regard  to  other  things  ;  for  he  ought  to  supply  the 
place  of  dead  vines,  or  trees,  by  substituting  others  in  their  stead  ;' 
and  to  act  in  every  respect,  like  a  good  husbandman, 

Of  Treasure  trove. 

XXXIX.  It  hath  been'allowed  by  the  emperor  Adrian,  in  pur- 
suance of  natural  equity,  that  any  treasure,  which  a  man  finds  in 
his  own  lands,  shall  become  the  property  of  the  finder;  and  that 
whatever  is  casually  found,  in  a  sacred  or  religious   place,  shall 
also  become  the  property  of  him,  who  finds  it.     But,  if  a  person, 
not  making  it  his  business    to  search,   should  fortuitously  find  a 
treasure  in  the   ground  of  another,  the  emperor  hath  granted  the 
half  of  such  treasure  to  the  proprietor  of  the  soil,  and  half  to  the 
finder.     He  hath   in  like  manner  ordained,  that,  if  any  thing  is 
found  within  the  imperial  demesnes,  half  shall  appertain  to  the 
finder,   and   half  to  the  emperor  :  and,  similar  to  this,  if  a  man 
finds   any  valuable  thing  in  a   place  or  district  belonging  to  the 
treasury,  the  public,  or  the  city,  the  same  emperor  hath  decreed, 
that  half  shall  appertain  to  the  finder,  and  half  to   the  treasury, 
the  public,  or  the  city,  to  which  the  place  or  district  belongs. 

Of  Tradition.     1.   The  Rule  and  its  reason. 

XL.  Things  are  also  acquired  (according  to  the  law  of  nature) 
by  tradition  or  livery  ;  for  nothing  is  more  conformable  to  natural 
equity,  than  to  confirm  the  will  of  him,  who  is  desirous  to  trans, 
fer  his  property  into  the  hands  of  another :  and  therefore  corpo- 
real things,  of  whatever  kind  they  are,  may  be  delivered ;  and, 
when  delivered  by  the  true  owner,  are  absolutely  aliened.  Sti- 
pendiary and  tributary  possessions  (and  those,  which  are  situated 
in  the  provinces,  are  so  called)  may  also  be  aliened  in  the  same 
manner ;  for  between  these,  and  the  Italian  estates,  we  have  now 

VOL,  1.  NO.  4.  H 


5S  THE  INSTITUTES  p.  n.  T.  j, 

taken  away  all  distinction,  by  our  imperial  ordinance :  so  that,  on 
account  of  a  donation,  a  marriage-portion,  or  any  other  just  cause, 
stipendiary  and  tributary  possessions  may  undoubtedly  be  trans- 
ferred  by  livery. 

2.  Of  Limitation. 

XLI.  Things,  although  sold  and  delivered,  are  not  yet  acquired 
by  the  buyer,  until  he  hath  either  paid  the  seller  for  them,  or  satis- 
fied him  in  some  other  manner  ;  as  by  a  bondsman  or  pledge.  And, 
although  this  is  so  ordained  by  a  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  yet  the 
game  rule  of  justice  is  rightly  said  to  arise  from  the  law  of  nations  ; 
that  is,  from  the  law  of  nature.  But  if  the  seller  shall  have  given 
credit  to  the  buyer,  \ye  must  affirm,  that  the  things  will  then  be^ 
come  instantly  the  property  of  the  latter. 

3.  Ampliation. 

XLII.  It  makes  no  difference,  whether  the  owner  of  a  parti- 
cular thing  delivered  it  himself,  or  whether  another,  to  whom  the 
care  and  possession  of  it  was  intrusted,  shall  have  delivered  it 
with  the  owner's  consent.  And,  for  this  reason,  if  the  free  and 
universal  administration  of  all  business  is  committed  by  a  pro- 
prietor to  any  certain  person,  and  the  committee,  by  virtue  of  his 
commission,  shall  sell  and  deliverany  goods,  then  will  such  goods 
become  the  property  of  the  receiver. 

Of  Fictitious  Tradition.. 

XLIII.  In  some  cases,  even  without  delivery,  the  mere  consent 
of  the  proprietor  is  sufficient  to  transfer  property  :  as  when  it  hap-» 
pens,  that  a  person  hath  lent  any  thing  to  you,  hath  let  it,  or  de- 
posited it  in  your  possession,  and  hath  afterwards  sold  it  to  you, 
made  a  donation  of  it,  or  given  it  to  you,  as  a  marriage  portion  : 
for  although  he  shall  not  have  delivered  it,  for  any  of  these  last 
mentioned  purposes,  yet,  as  soon  as  it  is  by  consent  reputed  to  be 
yours, you  have  instantly  acquired  the  property  of  it;  and  that  a? 
fully,  as  if  it  had  actually  been  delivered  to  you,  as  a  thing  sold, 
a, donation,  or  a  marriage  portion. 

Of  the  Delivery  of  Keys. 

XLIV.  Also  if  a  person  hath  sold  any  species  of  merchandise, 
deposited  in  a  store-house,  such  person  is   understood  to  have 
transferred  the  property  of  his  merchandise,  as  soon  as  he  hath 
delivered  the  keys  of  the  store-house  to  the  buyer. 
Of  Missile  Gifts. 

XLV.  It  also  sometimes  happens,  that  the  property  of  a  thing 
is  transferred,  by  the  master  of  it,  to  an  uncertain  person  :  thus 
for  instance,  when  the  praetors  and  consuls  cast  their  missilia,  or 
liberalities,  among  the  people,  they  know  not  what  any  particular 


B.  ii.  T.I.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  5£> 

roan  will  receive  ;  and  yet,  because  it  is  their  will  and  desire,  that 
what  every  man  then  receives  shall  be  his  own,  it  therefore  in- 
stantly becomes  his  property. 

Of  Derelicts. 

XLVI.  By  a  ,parity  of  reason  it  appears  true,  that  a  thing, 
which  hath  been  made  a  derelict  by  the  owner,  will  become  the 
property  of  the  first  occupant.  And  whatever  hath  either  been 
thrown  away,  or  abandoned  by  the  owner,  to  the  intent,  that  it 
might  never  more  be  reckoned  among  his  possessions,  is  properly 
accounted  a  derelict :  and  therefore  ceases  to  be  his  property. 

Of  Goods  thrown  ov&r-board. 

XL VII.  But  the  law  is  otherwise  in  respect  to  those  things, 
which  are  thrown  over-board  in  a  storm,  for  the  sake  of  lighten- 
ing a  ship;  for  such  things  remain  the  property  of  the  owners, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  evident,  that  they  were  not  thrown  away, 
through  dislike,  but  that  each  person  in  the  ship  might  avoid  the 
dangers  of  the  sea.  And,  upon  this  account,  whoever  hath,  with 
a  lucrative  intention,  taken  away  such  goods,  although  found  even 
upon  the  high  sea,  he  is  guilty  of  theft.  And,  with  these,  those 
goods  may  be  ranked,  which  have  dropped  from  a  carriage  in 
motion,  without  the  knowledge  of  the  owner. 


TITLE  II. 
OF  THINGS  CORPOREAL  AND  INCORPOREAL. 

Second  Division  of  Things. 

THINGS  may  also  be  farther  divided  into  corporeal  and  incor- 
poreal. Things  corporeal  are  those,  which  may  be  touched  ;  as, 
for  example,  lands,  slaves,  vestments,  gold,  silver,  and  others  in- 
numerable. Things  incorporeal  are  those,  which  are  not  subject 
to  the  touch,  but  consist  in  rights  and  privileges;  as  inheritances, 
usufructs,  uses,  and  all  obligations,  in  what  manner  soever  they 
are  contracted  :  nor  is  it  an  objection  of  any  consequence  to  urge, 
that  things  corporeal  are  contained  in  an  inheritance:  for  fruits, 
gathered  from  the  earth,  are  corporeal;  and  that  also  is  generally 
corporeal,  which  is  due  to  us  upon  an  obligation;  as  a  field,  a 
slave,  or  money:  but  it  must  be  observed,  that  we  here  mean  only 
the  right  to  an  inheritance,  the  right  of  using  and  enjoying  any 
particular  thing,  and  the  right  of  an  obligation;  all  which  rights 
are  undoubtedly  incorporeal.  And  to  these  may  be  added  the 
rights,  or  rather  qualities,  of  rural  and  city  estates,  which  are  also 
termed  services. 


06 THE  INSTITUTES, B.  IT,  T.  in, 

TITLE  III. 

OF  THE  RIGHTS  AND  SERVICES  OF  COUNTRY  AND  CITY 

ESTATES. 

THE  rights  or  services  of  rural  estates  are  these;  a  path,  a. 
toad,  an  highioay,  and  an  aqueduct  or  free  passage  for  water.  A 
path  denotes  the  right  of  passing  and  repassing  on  foot  over  apo- 
ther  man's  ground,  but  not  of  driving  cattle  or  a  carriage  over  it. 
A  road  implies  the  liberty  of  driving  either  cattle  or  carriages: 
and  therefore  he,  who  hath  a  path,  hath  not  a  road:  but  he,  who 
hath  a  road,  hath  inclusively  a  path;  for  he  may  use  such  road, 
when  he  doth  not  drive  cattle.  An  high-way  is  a  service,  which 
imports  the  right  of  passing,  driving  cattle,  &c.  and  includes  in 
it  both  SL  path  and  a  road  :  and  an  aqueduct  is  a  service,  by  which 
one  man  may  have  the  right  of  a  free  passage  or  conduit  for  water* 
through  the  grounds  of  another. 

Of  the  Services  of  City  Estates. 

I.  The  services  of  city-estates  and  inheritances  are  those,  which 
appertain  and  adhere  to  buildings:  and  they  are  therefore  called 
the  services  of  city-estates,  because  we  call  all  edifices  city-estates 
although  they  are  built  upon  farms  or  in  villages.     It  is  required 
by  city-services,  that  neighbours  should  bear  the  burdens  of 
neighbours ;   and,  by  such  services,  one  neighbour  may  be  per- 
mitted to  place  a  beam  upon  the  wall  of  another; may  be 

compelled  to  receive  the  droppings  and  currents  from  the  gutter- 
pipes  of  another  man's  house,  upon  his  own  house,  area,  or  sewer; 

or  may  be  exempted  from  receiving  them  j or  may  be  restrained 

from  raising  his  house  in  height,  lest  he  should  darken  the  habi- 
tation of  his  neighbour. 

Of  other  rural  Services. 

II.  Some  are  with  reason  of  opinion,  that,  among  rural  services, 
we  ought  to  reckon  those,  by  which  we  obtain  the  right  of  draw- 
ing water,  watering  and  feeding  cattle,  making  lime,  digging 
sand,  &c.  in  the  ground  of  another. 

Of  those  who  may  owe  or  acquire  Services. 

III.  All  these  services  are  called  the  services  of  estates  or  inhe- 
ritances; because  they  can  not  be  constituted  without  an  inheri- 
tance to  support  them;  for  no  man  can  either  owe,  or  acquire,  a 
rural  or  city-service,  if  he  possesses  neither  house  nor  lands. 

How  Service  is  contracted. 

IV.  When  ever  any  one  is  willing  to  demise  the  right  of  a 
service  to  another,  he  may  do  it  by  contract  and  stipulation.     A 


B.  i.  T.  iv.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  01 

man  may  also  by  testament  prohibit  his  heir  from  heightening 
his  house,  lest  he  should  obstruct  the  view  of  his  neighbour:  or 
may  oblige  his  heir  to  permit  the  rafter  of  another  man's  house  to 
be  laid  upon  his  wall :  or  to  receive  upon  his  own  house  the 
droppings  of  anothers:  or  to  suffer  any  person  to  walk,  drive  cattle, 
or  draw  water  in  his  grounds. 


TITLE  IV. 

OF  USUFRUCT. 

Definition  of  Usufruct. 

AN  usufruct  is  the  right  of  using  and  enjoying,  without  dimi- 
nution, the  things,  which  are  the  property  of  another.  But 
although  an  usufruct  is  a  right,  and  therefore  incorporeal,  yet,  as 
it  appertains  always  to  a  substance,  it  necessarily  follows,  that,  if 
the  substance  perishes,  the  usufruct  must  cease. 
How  it  is  constituted. 

I.  The  usufruct  of  things  is  frequently  separated  from  the  pro- 
perty ;  and  this  happens  by  various  means:  it  happens,  for  instance, 
when  the  usufruct  is  bequeathed  by  testament:  for  the  heir  hath 
then  only  the  nude  property  vested  in  him,  whilst  the  legatee 

possesses  the  usufruct or,  on  the  contrary,  it  happens,  when  a 

testator  hath  bequeathed  his  lands  without  the  usufruct ;  for  then 
the  legatary  hath  only  the  nude  property,  whilst  the  heir  enjoya 
the  profits:  for  the  usufruct  may  be  bequeathed  to  one  man,  and 
the  lands,  without  the  usufruct,  to  another.     Yet,  if  any  man 
would  constitute  an  usufruct  otherwise,  than  by  testament,  he 
must  do  it  by  paction  and  stipulation.    But,  lest  the  property  of 
lands  should  be  rendered  wholly  unbeneficial  by  deducting  the 
usufruct  for  ever,  it  was  thought  convenient,  that  the  usufruct 
should  by  certain  means  become  extinguished,  and  revert  to  the 
property. 

In  what  things  it  consists. 

II.  The  usufruct  not  only  of  lands  and  houses  is  grantable,  but 
also  the  usufruct  of  slaves,  cattle,  and  other  things ;  except  those, 
of  which  the  nature  is  such,  that  they  may  be  consumed  by  using ; 
for  the  usufruct  of  such  things  is  neither  grantable  by  civil  policy, 
nor  natural  reason;  and  among  these  may  be  reckoned  wine,  oil, 
cloaths,  §c.     And  money  also  is  almost  of  the  same  nature;  for 
by  constant  use,  and  the  frequent  change  of  owners,  it  in  a  manner 
becomes  extinguished.     But  the  senate,  through  a  motive  of  pub- 
Ire  utility,  hath  ordained,  that  the  usufruct  of  these  things  may  be 


62 THE  INSTITUTES B.  11.  T.  IT, 

constituted,  if  a  sufficient  caution  is  given  upon  this*  account  to 
the  heir:  and  therefore,  if  the  usufruct  of  money  is  bequeathed, 
the  money  is  so  given  to  the  legatary,  as  to  make  it  instantly  his- 
own :  but  then  the  legatary,  lest  he  should  die,  or  suffer  diminution, 
is  obliged  to  give  security  to  the  heir  for  the  repayment  of  a  like, 
sum.  Other  things  also,  which  are  in  their  nature  liable  to  con- 
sumption in  using,  when  the  usufruct  of  them  is  bequeathed,  are 
so  delivered  to  the  legatary,  as  to  become  wholly  his  property  ; 
but  in  this  case,  after  an  exact  valuation  hath  been  made,  caution 
must  be  given  to  the  heir  for  the  payment  of  a  sum,  equal  to  such 
valuation,  either  at  the  death  of  the  legatary,  or  if  it  happens, 
that  he  should  suffer  diminution.  It  is  not  therefore  to  be  under- 
stood, that  the  senate  hath  created  an  usufruct  of  these  things, 
which  is  impossible;  but  that  the  senate  hath  constituted  a  quasi* 
usufruct  by  means  of  a  caution. 

How  it  is  finished. 

III.  The  usufruct  of  a  thing  determines  by  the  death  of  the 
usufructuary;  and  by  two  of  the  three  diminutions;  namely,  the 
greatest  and  the  middle  diminution,  or  change  of  state:  and  also5 
by  not  being  used,  according  to  the  manner,  and  during  the  time 
prescribed  :   all  which  things  are  set  forth  in  our  constitution. 
The  usufruct  of  a  thing  also  determines,  if  the  usufructuary  hath 
surrendered  it  to  the  lord  of  the  property;  but  a  cession  of  it  to 
a  stranger  does  not  work  a  surrender  to  the  proprietor  r  or,  on> 
the  contrary,  an  usufruct  determines,  if  the  usufructuary  hath  ac- 
quired the  property  of  it :  and  this  is  called  consolidation.     And 
it  is  certain,  if  an  house  hath  been  consumed  by  fire,  or  hath 
fallen  by  means  of  an  earthquake,  or  through  decay,  that  then 
the  usufruct  of  such  house  is  wholly  destroyed  ;   and  that  no  usu- 
fruct of  the  area,  or  ground  of  it,  can  afterwards  become  due  to 
the  usufructuary. 

When  it  is  finished. 

IV.  When  the  whole  usufruct  of  a  thing  is  determined,  it  then/ 
reverts  to  the  property ;  and,  from  that  instant  of  time,  the  owner 
of  the  nude  property  commences  to  have  a  full  and  intire  power 
over  the  thing. 


TITLE  V. 

OF  USE  AND  HABITATION. 
What  is  common  both  to  use  and  usufruct. 
THE  usufruct,  and  the  nude  use  of  a  thing,  are  both  of  then* 
constituted,  and  both  determined  by  the  same  means. 


B.  ii.  T.  v.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


The  difference  between  the  usufruct  and  the  use  of  Land. 

I.  There  is  less  benefit  and  emolument  in  the  use  of  a  thing-, 
than  in  the  usufruct :  for  he,  who  hath  but  simply  the  use  of  lands, 
is  understood  to  have  nothing  more  than  the  liberty  of  using  such 
a  quantity  of  herbs,  fruit,  flowers,  hay,  straw,  and  wood,  which 
may  be  sufficient  to  supply  his  daily  exigencies:  and  he  is  per- 
mitted only  to  be  commorant  upon  the  land,  on  condition,  that 
he  neither  becomes  troublesome  to  the  owner,  nor  impedes  the 
husbandmen  in  their  country-labors.     And  an  usuary,  having  but 
a  mere  use,  can  neither,  let,  sell,  or  give  away  his  right  to  another^ 
although  it  is  in  the  power  of  an  usufructuary  to  convey  his  usu- 
fruct, either  by  lease,  sale,  or  donation. 

Use  of  Houses. 

II.  He,  who  hath  but  the  mere  use  of  an  house,  is  understood 
to  have  a  right  in  it  so  far  only,  as  to  enable  him  to  inhabit  it  him- 
self; for  he  hath  no  power  to  transfer  this  right  to  another:  and 
it  is  hardly  thought  allowable,  that  he  should  receive  a  guest 
or  a  lodger.     But  the  usuary,  notwithstanding  what  has  been  said, 
hath  a  right  to  inhabit  the  house  together  with  his  wife,  his  child- 
ren, and  his  freed-men:    and  also  with  such  other  free  persons, 
who  are  in  the  quality  of  servants.     And,  agreeably  to  this,  if  the 
use  of  an  house  appertains  to  a  woman,  she  also  hath  the  liberty 
of  living  in  it  with  her  husband,  and  her  dependents. 

Of  the  use  of  a  Slave  and  Beast  of  burthen. 

III.  He  also,  who  hath  simply  the  use  of  a  slave,  can  benefit 
frimself  only  by  the  labor  and  service  of  such  slave:  for  it  is  by 
no  means  in  the  power  of  the  usuary  to  transfer  his  right  over  to 
another.     And  the  same  law  prevails  in  regard  to  beasts  of  burden. 

Of  the  use  of  Cattle. 

IV.  If  the  use  of  cattle  is  left  by  testament ;  as,  for  example, 
the  use  of  sheep;  yet  the  usuary  can  neither  use  the  milk,  the 
lambs,  nor  the  wool;   for  these  of  right  belong  to  the  usufruct. 
But  the  usuary  may  undoubtedly  employ  the  sheep,  in  soiling  and 
improving  his  lands. 

Of  Habitation. 

V.  An  habitation,  whether  given  by  testament,  or  constituted  by 
any  other  means,  appears  to  be  neither  an  use,  nor  an  usufruct, 
but  seems  to  be  rather  a  particular  right.      And  for  the  public 
utility  and   in  conformity  to  the  opinion  of  Marcellus^  we  have 
permitted,  by  our  decision,  that  he,  who  hath  an  habitation,  may 
pot  only  live  in  it,  but  also  let  it  to  another. 


64  THE  INSTITUTES B.  11.  T.  vi. 

VI.  What  we  have  already  delivered,  concerning  real  services, 
usufructs,  uses,  and  habitations/may  at  this  time  be  sufficient. 
Concerning  inheritances,  and  obligations,  we  will  treat  in  their 
proper  places.  We  have  already  explained  summarily  by  what 
means  things  are  acquired,  according  to  the  law  of  nations  ;  let  us 
now  therefore  examine,  by  what  means  they  are  acquired  accord- 
ing to  the  civil  law. 
•-  .'..  '•...',  •  •'.  ..  '  ~  ".. .  - •  -  .-  T 

TITLE  VI. 

OF    USUCAPION    AND    PRESCRIPTION. 

The  requisites  of  Usucapion.     1.  Good  Faith.     2.   Possession  for 
time  prescribed.     3.  A  just  Title. 

IT  was  antiently  decreed  by  the  civil  law,  that  he,  who  by 
means  of  purchase,  donation,  or  any  other  just  title,  had  obtained 
a  thing  from  another,  whom  he  thought  to  be  the  true  owner  of 
it,  (although  in  reality  he  was  not,)  and,  if  it  was  moveable,  had 
possessed  it  lonafide  for  the  space  of  one  year,  either  in  Italy  or 

the  provinces or,  if  it  was  immoveable,  had  possessed  it  for  the 

term  of  two  years  within  the  limits  of  Italy,  should  prescribe  to 
such  thing  by  use  :  and  this  was  held  to  be  law,  lest  the  dominion, 
or  property  of  things,  should  be  uncertain.  But  although  it  was 
thought  by  the  more  antient  legislators,  that  the  above  mentioned 
terms  were  of  sufficient  length  to  enable  every  owner  to  search 
after  his  different  kinds  of  property,  yet  a  better  determination 
hath  suggested  itself  to  our  thoughts,  lest  the  true  owners  should 
be  defrauded,  or  too  hastily  excluded,  by  the  circumscription  of 
time  and  place,  from  the  benefit  of  recovering  their  just  due:  and 
we  have  therefore  promulged  our  ordinance,  by  which  it  is  pro- 
vided, that  things  moveable  may  be  prescribed  to  after  the  expi- 
ration of  three  years,  and  that  a  possession,  during  a  long  tract  of 
time,  will  also  found  a  prescription  to  things  immoveable:  and 
note,  that,  by  a  long  tract  of  time,  we  mean  ten  years,  if  the  par- 
ties are  present,  (/.  e.  in  the  province,)  and  twenty  years,  if  either 
of  them  is  absent.  By  these  means  the  property  of  things  may  be 
acquired;  and  this  not  only  in  Italy,  but  throughout  our  domini- 
ons in  general,  if  the  possession  was  justly  founded, 
Of  Things  out  of  Commerce. 

I.  But  it  is  certain  in  some  cases,  that  although  there  hath  been 
a  possession  incontestably  bonafidc,  yet  no  length  of  time  will  be 
sufficient  to  found  a  prescription  ;  and  this  happens,  when  a  man 
possesses,  as  his  property,  a  free  person,  a  thing  sacred  or  reli- 
gious, or  a  fugitive  slave. 


B.  ii.  T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  65 

Of  Things  stolen  or  forcibly  detained. 

II.  It  is  also  equally  certain,  that  no  prescription  can  be  found- 
ed to  things  mo.veable,  which  have  been  stolen  ;  or  to  things  im- 
moveable,  seized  by  violence;  although  such  things  have  been 
possessed  bona  fide,  during  the  length  of  time  required  by  our 
constitution  :  for  a  prescription  to  things  stolen  is  prohibited  by 
a  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  and  also  by  the  law  Atilia;  and  the 
laws  Julia  and  Plautia  forbid  a  prescription  to  things  seized  by 
violence.  And  it  is  not  to  be  inferred  from  these  laws,  that  a  thief, 
or  disseizor  only,  is  prohibited  to  take  by  prescription:  (for such 
are  prohibited  for  another  reason,  namely,  because  they  are  frau- 
dulent and  dishonest  possessors;)  but  all  other  persons  are  also 
disabled  from  prescribing  to  things  stolen,  or  seized  forcibly, 
although  they  shall  have  purchased  such  things  bona  fide,  or 
otherwise  received  them  upon  a  just  account;  and  from  hence  it 
follows,  that  things  moveable  can  not  easily  be  prescribed  to,  even 
by  honest  possessors:  for  whoever  hath  either  sold  or  delivered 
the  goods  of  another  knowingly,  upon  any  consideration,  he  is 
guilty  of  theft.  But  this  rule  sometimes  admits  of  exceptions: 
for  in  some  cases  a  thing  moveable  may  be  prescribed  to:  thus, 
if  an  heir,  thinking  a  particular  thing  to  be  hereditary,  which  in 
reality  had  only  been  lent,  let  to,  or  deposited  with  the  deceased, 
shall  have  sold,  given  it,  or  otherwise  disposed  of  it  to.  another, 
who  received  it  bona  fide,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  that  the 
receiver  may  prescribe ;  for  such  thing  can  never  be  reputed  stolen, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  honestly  possessed  from  the  beginning ;  and 
the  heir,  who  hath  aliened  it,  beleiving  it  to  have  been  his  own 
property,  hath  committed  no  theft.  Also  if  he,  who  hath  the 
usufruct  of  a  female  slave,  either  sells  or  gives  away  the  child  of 
such  slave,  believing  it  to  be  his  own  property,  he  does  not  com- 
mit theft;  for  theft  can  not  be  constituted  without  an  intention 
to  commit  it.  It  may  also  happen,  by  various  means,  that  one 
man  may  transfer  the  property  of  another  without  theft,  and  give 
a  right  of  prescription  to  the  possessor.  And  in  regard  to  things 
immoveable  the  law  ordains,  that,  if  any  man  should  take  pos- 
session of  an  estate  without  force,  by  reason  either  of  the  absence, 
or  negligence  of  the  owner,  or  because  he  died  without  heirs,  and 
(although  he  hath  thus  possessed  the  land  dishonestly)  shall  have 
made  livery  of  it  to  another,  who  took  it  bona  fide,  the  land  by 
long  possession  may  be  acquired  by  such  taker,  who  can  not  be 
said  to  have  received  either  a  thing  stolen,  or  possessed  by  vio- 
lence: for  the  opinion  of  those  antient  lawyers,  who  held,  that 
lands  and  things  immoveable,  might  be  stolen,  is  now  abolished : 

VOL.  i,  NO.  4.  I 


<30  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  vi. 

and  it  is  therefore  provided  by  the  imperial  constitutions,  in  favour 
of  all  such,  who  possess  an  immoveable  property,  that  a  long  and 
undoubted  possession  ought  not  to  be  taken  away. 
Of  purging  defective  Titles. 

III.  A  prescription  may  sometimes  be  founded  even  to  things, 
which  have  been  stolen,  or  possessed  by  violence;  as  for  instance, 
when  such  things  shall  have  fallen  again  under  the  power  of  their 
true  owner;  for  they  are  then  reputed  to  be  purged  from  the 
contamination  of  theft  or  violence,  and  may  afterwards  be  claimed 
by  prescription. 

Of  Things  belonging  to  the  Royal  Treasury. 

IV.  The  things,  which  appertain  to  our.treasury,  can  not  be 
acquired  by  prescription.    But,  when  things  escheatable  have  not 
been  certified  to  the  treasury,  it  is  held  by  Papinian,  that  a  pur- 
chaser, bona  fide,  may  prescribe  to  any  of  them  after  delivery. 
And  not  only  the  emperor  Pius,  but  the  emperors  Severus  and 
Antoninus  have  also  issued  their  rescripts,  conformable  to  this 
opinion. 

General  Rule. 

V.  It  is  lastly  to  be  observed,  that,  if  any  man  shall  purchase 
a  particular  thing  bona  jide,  or  obtain  the  possession  of  it  by  any 
other  just  title,  he  can  by  no  means  prescribe  to  it,  unless  the 
thing,  in  itself,  is  free  from  all  manner  of  exception. 

Of  mistaken  Possession. 

VI.  A  mistake  of  the  cause  of  possession  shall  not  give  rise  to 
a  prescription  :  as  when  he,  who  possesses  a  thing,  imagines,  that 
he  hath  purchased   it,  when  he  hath  not  purchased  it;   or  that 
the  thing  was  a  gift,  when  in  reality  it  was  not  given. 

Of  bojia  fide  possession. 

VII.  If  a  thing  immoveable  is  possessed  by  any  man  bona  fide, 
so  that  the  possession  is  justly  commenced,  then  the  heir  of  that 
inan,  when  deceased,  or  the  possessor  of  his  goods,  may  continue 
the  possession,  so  as  to  raise  a  prescription,  although  he  is  consci- 
ous, that  what  he  possesses  is  the  property  of  another;  but,  if  the 
possession  was  commenced  from  the  beginning  mala  fide,  or  un- 
justly, then  will  the  continuance  of  it  avail  neither  the  heir,  nor 
the  possessor  of  the  goods,  although  he  was  ignorant  of  any  male- 
feazance.     And  we  have  enacted  by  our  imperial  constitution, 
that  the  time  of  usucapion  or  prescription  to  things  moveable  shall 
be  continued  in  the  same  manner  from  the  deceased  to  his  suc- 
cessor. 


B,  ii.  T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  67 

VIII.  And  in  regard  to  the  computation  of  the  years,  necessary 
to  raise  a  prescription,  the  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  have 
ordained  by  their  rescript,  that,  between  seller  and  buyer,  the 
time  of  the  continuance  of  the  possession  of  the  one  shall  be 
joined  to  the  time  of  the  continuance  of  the  possession  of  the 
other. 

Of  Imperial  Gifts,  or  Grants. 

IX.  It  is  enacted  by  an  edict  of  the  emperor  Marcus,  that,  when 
a  thing  is  purchased  from  the  treasury,  the  purchaser,  after  an 
uninterrupted  possession  of  it  for  the  space  of  five  years,  subse- 
quent to  the  sale,  may  repel  the  true  owner  by  an  exception  of 
prescription.     But  the  emperor  Zeno,  of  sacred  memory,  hath 
^vell  provided  by  his  constitution,  that  all  those,  who  by  sale, 
donation,  or  any  other  title,  have  received  things  either  moveable, 
or  immoveable,  from  the  public  treasury,  may  instantly  be  secured 
in  their  possession,  and  made  certain  of  success,  whether  they  are 

plaintiffs  or  defendents< and  that  those,  who  think,  that  they 

are  intitled  to  certain  actions,  either  as  proprietors  or  mortgagees 
of  the  things  aliened,  may  commence  their  suits  against  the  trea-, 
sury,  at  any  time  within  the  space  of  four  years,  but  not  after,- 
wards.     And,  in  our  own  sacred  ordinance,  which  we  have  lately 
promulged  in  favour  of  those,  who  receive  any  thing,  whether 
moveable  or  immoveable,  from  the  private  possessions  either  of 
our-self,  or  of  the  empress,  our  consort,  we  have  made  the  same 
regulations,  which  are  contained  in  the  above  mentioned  constitu- 
tion of  the  emperor  Zeno,  concerning  fiscal  alienations. 

TITLE  VII. 
OF  DONATIONS. 

Of  Donation. 

THERE  is  another  way ,* by  which  property  is  acquired,  namely 
by  donation  ;  of  which  there  are  two  kinds  ;  the  one  mortis  causa, 
j.  e,  on  account  of  death  ;  the  other  non  mortis  causa,  i.  e.  not  on 
account  of  death ;  and  this  takes  effect,  during  the  life  of  the  donor. 

Of  Donation  in  prospect  of  Death. 

I.  A  donation  on  account  of  death  is  that,  which  is  made  under 
-an  apprehension  or  suspicion  of  death  :  as  when  any  thing  is  given 
upon  condition,  that,  if  the  donor  dies,  the  donee  shall  possess  it 
absolutely  ;  or  that  the  thing  given  shall  be  returned,  if  the  donor 
should  survive  the  danger,  which  he  apprehends  ;  or  should  re- 
pent, that  he  hath  made  the  gift ;  or,  if  the  donee  should  die  be- 
fore the  donor.  Donations  mortis  causa,  are  now  reduced,  as  fa%r 


(58  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T. 

as  possible,  to  the  similitude  of  legacies  :  for,  when  it  was  much 
doubted  by  our  lawyers,  whether  a  donation  mortis  causa  ought 
to  be  reputed  as  a  gift,  or  as  a  legacy,  inasmuch  as,  in  some  things, 
it  partakes  of  the  nature  of  both,  we  then  constituted  and  ordained, 
that  every  such  donation  should  be  considered  as  a  legacy ;  and 
be  made  in  the  manner,  which  our  constitution  directs.  But,  in 
brief,  a  donation,  mortis  causa,  is  then  said  to  be  made,  when  a 
man  so  gives,  as  to  demonstrate,  that  he  would  rather  possess  the 
thing  given  himself,  than  that  the  donee  should  possess  it ;  and 
yet,  at  the  same  time,  evinces,  that  he  is  more  willing  that  the 
donee  should  possess  it,  than  his  own  heir. 

The  donation,  which  Telemachus  makes  to  Pirwus  in   Homer, 
is  of  this  species. 

He  (when  Pirceus  ask'd  for  slaves,  to  bring 
The  gifts  and  treasures  of  the  Spartan  king) 

Thus  thoughtful  answer'd : those  we  shall  not  move, 

Dark  and  unconscious  of  the  will  of  Jove. 
We  know  not  yet  the  full  event  of  all : 
Stabb'd  in  his  palace,  if  your  prince  must  fall, 
Us,  and  our  house,  if  treason  must  o'erthrow, 
Better  a  friend  possess  them  than  a  foe. 
But  on  my  foes  should  vengeance  heav'n  decree^ 
Riches  are  welcome  then,  not  else,  to  me  ; 

'Till  then,  retain  the  gifts. POPES'S  ODYSS.lib.  17, 

Of  simple  Donation. 

II.  Donations,  made  without  any  thought  or  apprehension  of 
death,  we  call  donations  inter  vivos ;  and  these  admit  of  no  com- 
parison with  legacies :  for,  when  once  they  are  perfected,  they 
cannot  afterwards  be  revoked  without  cause  :  and  donations  are 
then  esteemed  perfect,  when  the  donor  hath  declared  and  mani- 
fested his  will  either  in  writing  or  otherwise.  And  it  is  appointed 
by  our  constitution,  that  a  donation  inter  vivos  shall,  in  imitation 
of  a  sale,  necessarily  inforce  a  delivery;  for  when  things  are 
given  they  become  fully  and  perfectly  Vested  in  the  donee,  and  it 
is  incumbent  upon  the  donor  to  deliver  them  :  and,  although  it  is 
enacted  by  the  constitutions  of  our  predecessors,  that  donations, 
amounting  to  the  value  of  two  hundred  solidi,  shall  be  publicly 
and  formally  enrolled  and  registered,  we  have  yet  thought  it 
expedient  to  enlarge  this  sum  to  five  hundred  solidi  by  our  ordi- 
nance, by  which  we  pennit  all  donations  of  less  value  to  be  firm 
and  binding  without  insinuation  or  enrollment ;  and  there  are  like- 
wise some  donations,  which,  although  they  exceed  five  hundred 
solidi,  are  yet  of  full  forre  without  insinuation,  We  have  also, 


B.  1  1.  -T.  v  i  T.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


for  the  enlargement  of  donations,  enacted  many  other  rules,  all 
whith  may  be  collected  by  perusing  our  constitutions,  set  forth 
for  that  purpose.  It  nevertheless  remains  to  be  observed,  that, 
when  a  donation  is  fully  and  validly  made,  the  donor  may  re- 
voke it  on  account  of  ingratitude  in  the  donee  in  some  particular 
.cases  :  and  this  may  be  done,  lest  he,  who  hath  been  liberal  and 
kind  to  another,  should  in  any  of  the  instances,  enumerated 
in  our  constitution,  suffer  either  injury  or  damage  from  him,  upon 
whom  a  benefit  was  conferred. 

Of  Donation  before  Marriage  and  by  reason  of  Marriage. 

III.  There  is  also  another  species  of  donation  inter  vivos,  which 
was  wholly  unknown  to  the  ancient  lawyers,  being  introduced  by 
later  emperors  ;  this  species  of  donations  inter  vivos  was  called 
ante  nuptias  (i.e.  before  marriage),  and  contained  in  it  the  follow- 
ing tacit  condition  ;  namely,  that  it  should  then  take  effect,  when 
the  marriage  was  performed  ;  and  these  donations  were  properly 
called  ante  nuptias,  because  they  could  never  be  constituted  after 
the  celebration  of  matrimony.     But,  inasmuch  as  it  was  permitted 
by  the  antient  law,  that  portions  might  be  augmented  after  mar- 
riage, the  emperor  Justin,  our  father,  hath  enacted  by  his  con- 
stitution, that  donations  called  ante  nuptias  might  also  be  aug- 
mented at  any  time,  whilst  the  matrimony  subsisted  :  and,  as  it 
was  improper,  that  a  donation  should  be  still  termed  ante  nuptias 
when  it  had  received   an  augmentation  post  nuptias,  i.  e.  after 
iiiatrimony,  we  therefore  being  desirous,  that  our  sanctions  might 
Become  as  prefect  as  possible,  and  that  names  should  be  properly 
adapted  to  things,  have  ordained  and  constituted,  that  the  above 
fnentioned  donations  may  be  not  only  augmented,  but  may  also 
receive  their  commencement  at  any  time  during  matrimony,  and 
that  for  the  future  they  shall  not  be  called  donations  ante  nuptias, 
but  donations  propter  nuptias;  i.  e.  on  account  of  marriage  :  and 
thus  these  donations  are  made  equal  with  portions  ;  for  as  portions 
may  be  augmented,  and  even  made,  when  matrimony  is  subsisting 
and  persons  are  actually  married,  so  donations,  which  are  intro- 
duced on  account  of  matrimony,  may  now  not  only  precede  mar- 
jriage,  but  be  augmented,   or  even  constituted,  after  the  celebra- 
tion of  it. 

Of  the  Right  of  Accretion. 

IV.  There  was  formerly  another  manner  of  acquiring  property 
by  the  civil  law  ;  namely  by  accretion  ;  as  for  instance,  if  Primus 
had  possessed  a  slave  in    common  with  Titius,  and  Primus  had 
enfranchised  that   slave,   either  by  the  vindicta  or  by  testament, 
then  would  the  share  of  Primus  in  that  slave  be  lost,  and  accrue 


70  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  vii. 

to  Titius.  But,  inasmuch  as  it  affords  a  bad  example,  that  a  mau 
should  be  defrauded  of  his  liberty,  and  that  those  masters,  who 
are  most  humane,  should  suffer  loss,  whilst  those,  who  are  most 
severe,  receive  emolument,  we  have  thought  it  necessary,  that  a 
proper  remedy  should  be  applied  to  this  grievance  ;  and  we  have 
found  a  method,  by  which  the  manumittor,  his  co-partner,  and 
the  freed  person,  may  all  partake  of  our  beneficence  :  for  we  have 
decreed,  (and  it  is  manifest,  that  the  antient  legislators  have  often 
transgressed  the  strict  rules  of  law  in  favor  of  liberty,)  that  free- 
dom, although  granted  by  one  partner  only,  shall  immediately 
take  elfect :  so  that  the  manumittor  shall  have  reason  to  be  pleased 
with  the  validity  of  his  gift,  if  his  co-partner  is  indemnified  by 
receiving  his  share  of  the  worth  of  the  slave. 


TITLE  VIII. 

WHO  MAY  ALIENATE  AND  WHO  MAY  NOT. 

Of  the  Husband. 

IT  sometimes  happens,  that  the  proprietor  of  a  thing  cannot 
alien  it,  and  on  the  contrary  that  he,  who  is  not  the  proprietor, 
may  alien  it:  for  example,  by  the  law  Julia  an  husband  is  pro- 
hibited to  make  an  alienation  of  lands,  which  came  to  him  in 
right  of  his  wife,  unless  his  wife  consents  to  the  alienation  :  and 
yet  every  man  is  deemed  the  proprietor  of  whatever  is  given 
to  him,  as  a  marriage  portion.  But,  in  this  respect,  we  have 
corrected  the  law  Julia,  and  brought  it  into  a  better  state  ;  for, 
having  observed,  that  this  law  regards  only  those  immoveable 
possessions,  which  are  situated  within  the  precincts  of  Italy,  and 
that,  although  it  inhibits  the  husband  to  make  a  mortgage  of  such 
possessions,  even  with  the  consent  of  his  wife,  yet  it  permits  him, 
with  the  consent  of  his  wife,  to  make  an  alienation,  we  have 
therefore  provided  a  remedy  by  our  imperial  authority  ;  so  that 
now  no  husband  can  either  alien  or  mortgage,  even  with  the  con- 
sent of  his  wife,  any  immoveable  possession,  whether  provincial 
or  Italian,  obtained  with  her,  as  a  marriage  portion;  and  we 
have  been  induced  to  make  these  regulations,  lest  the  frailty  of 
women  should  occasion  the  ruin  of  their  fortunes. 

Of  Creditors. 

I.  But  a  creditor,  by  virtue  of  a  compact,  may  sell  or  alien  a 
pledge,  although  it  is  not  his  own  property ;  yet  this  seems  to 
be  allowable  for  no  other  reason,  than  because  the  p}edge  is  un- 
derstood to  be  aliened  by  the  consent  of  the  debtor,  with  whoni 
it  was  covenanted  from  the  commencement  of  the  contract,  that 


B.  IT.  T.  vii.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


71 


the  creditor  might  be  permitted  to  sell  the  pledge,  if  the  money 
borrowed  was  not  paid  at  the  time  stipulated.  But,  lest  the  cre- 
ditors should  be  impeded  from  prosecuting,  what  is  justly  due  to 
them,  and  lest  debtors,  on  the  contrary,  should  lose  the  property 
of  their  possessions  too  soon,  we  have  in  our  ordinance,  pro- 
mulged  for  this  purpose,  instituted  certain  methods,  by  which 
the  sale  of  pledges  may  be  warrantably  made  :  and,  through  the 
whole  tenor  of  our  constitution,  a  sufficient  caution  hath  been 
taken  in  regard  to  both  creditors  and  debtors. 

Of  Pupils. 

II.  It  must  now  be  observed,  that  no  pupil,  whether  male  or 
female,  hath  power  to  alien  any  thing  without  the  authority  of 
a  tutor:  and  therefore,  if  a  pupil,  without  the  authority  of  his 
tutor,  shall  lend  money  to  any  man,  such  pupil  contracts  no  ob-< 
ligation  :  for  he  is  incapable  of  vesting  the  property  of  his  money 
in  the  borrower;  and  therefore  the  money  may  be  claimed  by 
vindication,  (that  is,  by  a  real  action,)  if  it  exists  intire  and  un- 
spent.    But  if  money,  lent  by  a  minor,  is  consumed  by  the  bor- 
rower, bona  fide,  (I.  e.  believing  that  the  lender  was  of  full  age) 
it  may  be  recovered  from  such  borrower  by  condiction,  that  is, 
by  a  personal  action.     And,   if  such  money  is  consumed  by  the 
borrower  mala  fide,  an  action  ad  exhibendum  will  lie  against  him. 

III.  But,  on  the  contrary,  the  property  of  any  thing  may  be 
transferred  to  pupils,  whether  male  or  female,   without  the  au- 
thority of  their  tutors :   yet,  if  a  debtor  makes  a  payment  to  a 
pupil,  it  is  necessary  that  the  debtor  should  be  warranted  by  the 
authority  of  the  pupil's  tutor;  otherwise  he  will  not  be  acquitted 
of  the  debt :  and  this,  for  a  most  evident  reason,  was  ordained  by 
a  constitution,  which  we  promulged  to  the  advocates  of  Ccesarea, 
at  the  suggestion  of  that  most  eminent  man  Tribonian,  the  quaes- 
tor of  our  sacred  palace :  and  by  this  constitution  it  is  enacted, 
that  the  debtor  of  a  minor  may  lawfully  pay  any  sum  to  his  tu- 
tor or  curator,  if  a  judicial  decree,   permitting  the  payment,  is 
previously  obtained  without  expense  to  the  minor :  for,  when  the 
payment  of  a  debt  is  warranted  by,  and  subsequent  to,  the  decree 
of  a  judge,  it  is  always  attended  with  the  fullest  security.     But, 
although  money  hath  been  paid  to  a  pupil,  otherwise  than  we 
have  ordained,  yet,  if  he  should  afterwards  require,  that  the  mo- 
ney should  be  paid  him  again,  and  demand  it  by  action,  he  might 
be  deprived  of  his  plea  by  an  exception  of  fraud,  if  it  could  be 
proved,  that  he  had  become  richer  by  the  increase  of  this  money; 
or  even  that  he  had  preserved  it  safely.     But,  if  the  pupil  hath 


79  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  vnr* 

squandered  and  consumed  the  money  paid  to  him,  or  lost  it  either 
by  theft  or  violence,  an  exception  of  fraud  will  be  of  no  benefit 
to  the  debtor,  who  will  be  compelled  to  make  a  second  payment, 
because  the  first  was  made  inconsiderately,  without  the  autho- 
rity of  the  tutor,  and  not  according  to  our  ordinance.  Pupils  are 
also  incapacitated  to  pay  money  without  the  authority  of  their 
tutors;  because  money,  when  paid  by  a  pupil  without  such  au- 
thority, doth  not  become  the  property  of  him  to  whom  it  is 
paid:  for  the  alienation  of  no  one  thing  is  granted  to  a  pupil 
without  the  authority  of  his  tutor. 


TITLE  IX. 

BY  WHAT  PERSONS  THINGS  MAY  BE  ACQUIRED. 
Summary. 

THINGS  may  be  acquired  not  only  by  ourselves,  but  also* 
by  those  who  are  under  our  power ;  and  also  by  slaves,  of  whom 

we  have  the  usufruct  only acquisitions  may  also  be  made  for 

us  by  free-men, and  even  by  slaves,  whom  we  possess  bona 

fide,  although  they  are  the  property  of  another.    Let  us  therefore 
inquire  diligently  concerning  all  these  persons. 
Of  Children  under  Power. 

I.  It  was  anciently  the  law,  that  whatever  estate  came  to  child- 
ren, whether  male  or  female,  who  were  under  the  power  of  their 
parents,it  was  acquired  forthe  pareutsof  such  children  without  any 
diminution,  if  we  except  thepeculium  castrcnse  :  and  these  estates- 
were  so  absolutely  vested  in  the  parents,  that  what  was  acquired  by 
one  child  they  might  have  given  to  another  child,  or  to  a  stranger; 
or  might  have  sold  it,  or  applied  in  what  manner,  and  to  what 
purpose  they  thought  proper :  but  this  seemed  to  be  inhuman  j 
and  we  have  therefore,  by  a  general  constitution,  mitigated  the 
rigour  of  the  law  in  regard  to  children,  and  have,  at  the  same 
time,  maintained  that  honour  which  is  due  to  parents  ;  having, 
ordained,  that,  if  any  thing  accrues  to  the  son  by  means  of  the 
father's  fortune,  the  whole  shall  be  acquired  for  the  father,  ac- 
cording to  ancient  practice  :  for  can  it  be  unjust,  that  the  wealth, 
which  the  son  hath  obtained,  by  means  of  the  father,  should  re- 
vert to  him?)  but  that  the  dominion  and  property  of  whatever 
the  Ron  of  a  family  hath  acquired,  by  any  other  means,  shall  re- 
main in  the  son  ;  and  that  the  father  shall  be  intitled  only  to  the 
usufruct  of  such  acquisitions.  And  this  we  have  thought  proper 
to  decree,  lest  that,  which  hath  accrued  to  a  man  from  his  labour 
or  good  fortune,  should  be  unjustly  transferred  to  another,. 


B.  ir.  T.  ix.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  73 

Of  the  Emancipation  of  Children. 

II.  We  have  also  regarded  the  interest  of  children  in  respect  to 
emancipation:  fora  parent,  when  he  emancipated   his  children, 
might,  according  to  former  constitutions,  have  taken  to  himself, 
if  he  was  so  inclined,  the  property  of  the  third  part  of  those  things, 
"which  were  excepted  from  paternal  acquisition,  retaining  it  as  the 
price  of  emancipation.    But  it  appeared  to  be  inhuman,  that  the 
son  should  be  thus  defrauded  of  the  third  part  of  his  property, 
and  that  the  honour,  which  he  had  obtained  by  becoming  inde- 
pendent, should  be  decreased  by  the  diminution  of  his  estate;  and 
we  have  therefore  decreed,  that  the  parent  instead  of  the  third 
part  of  the  property,  which  he  formerly  might  have  retained,  shall 
now  he  intitled  to  an  half-share,  not  of  the  property,  but  of  the 
usufruct;  so  that  the  property  will,  for  the  future,  remain  intire 
in  the  sou,  and  the  father  will  enjoy  a  greater  share:  namely,  half 
instead  of  a  third  part. 

Of  OUT  Slaves. 

III.  Whatever  our  slaves  have  at  any  time  acquired,  whether 
by  delivery,  stipulation,  donation,  bequest,  or  any  other  means, 
the  same  is  reputed  to  be  acquired  by  ourselves,  and  we  thus  ac- 
quire things,  although  we  are  ignorant  of,  or  even  averse  to,  the 
acquisition  ;  for  he,  who  is  a  slave,  can  have  no  property.     And, 
if  a  slave  is  instituted  an  heir,  he  cannot  otherwise  take  upon  him- 
self the  inheritance,  than  at  the  command  of  his  master;  but,  if 
the  slave  is  commanded  to  do  this,  the  inheritance  is  as  fully  ac- 
quired by  the  master,  as  if  he  had  been  himself  made  the  heir; 
and  consequently  a  legacy,  left  to  a  slave,  is  acquired  by  his  mas- 
ter.   It  is  farther  to  be  observed,  that  masters  acquire  by  their 
slaves  not  only  the  property  of  things,  but  also  the  possession  ;  for 
whatever  is  possessed  by  a  slave,  the  same  is  deemed  to  be  pos- 
sessed by  his  master ;  who  may  therefore  found  a  prescription  to 
it  by  means  of  his  slave. 

Of  Usufructuaries. 

IV.  In  regard  to  those  slaves,  of  whom  the  possessor  has  the 
usufruct  only,  it  is  an  established  rule,  that,  whatever  they  acquire 
by  means  of  his  goods,  or  by  their  own  work  and  labour,  it  ap- 
pertains to  their  usufructuary  master:  but  whatever  is  obtained 
by  a  slave,  otherwise  than  by  those  means,  it  belongs  to  him,  who 
hath  the  property  of  the  slave :  and  therefore,  if  a  slave  is  instituted 
an  heir,  or  hath  received  a  legacy,  or  gift,  the  inheritance,  legacy, 
or  gift,  will  not  be  acquired  for  the  usufructuary  master,  but  for 
the  proprietor. 

VOL.  I.  No.  4.  K 


74  THE  INSTITUTES  B,  11.  T.  ix. 

Continuation. 

,  V.  The  same  rule  is  observed  in  regard  to  him,  who  is  possessed 
as  a  slave  bona  fide,,  whether  he  is  a  free-man,  or  the  slave  of  ano- 
ther: for  the  law  concerning  an  usufructuary  master  prevails 
equally  in  relation  to  a  bona  fide  possessor ;  and  therefore  what- 
ever is  acquired  otherwise,  than  by  the  two  causes  abovemen- 
tioned,  it  either  belongs  to  the  person  possessed,  if  he  is  free;  or 
to  the  proprietor,  if  the  person  possessed,  is  the  slave  of  another. 
But  a  bona  fide  possessor*  who  hath  gained  a  slave  by  usucapion 
or  prescription,  (inasmuch  as  he  thus  becomes  the  absolute  pro- 
prietor,) can  acquire  by  virtue  of  such  slave,  by  all  manner  of 
ways.  But  an  usufructuary  master  can  not  prescribe;  first,  be- 
cause he  can  never  be  strictly  said  to  possess,  having  only  the 
power  of  using  ;  and  farther,  because  he  knows,  that  the  slave  be- 
longs to  another.  We  nevertheless  may  acquire  not  only  property, 
but  also  possession,  by  means  of  the  slaves,  whom  we  possess  bona 
Jide,  or  of  whom  we  have  only  the  usufruct;  and  even  by  means 
of  a  free  person,  of  whom  we  have  a  bona  fide  possession.  But, 
in  saying  this,  we  adhere  to  the  distinction,  which  we  have  before 
explained,  and  speak  of  those  things  only,  of  which  a  slave  may 
acquire  the  possession,  either  by  means  of  the  goods  of  his  master, 
or  by  his  own  industry. 

Of  other  Persons. 

VI.  It  is  apparent  from  what  has  been  said,  that  we  can  by  no 
means  make  acquisitions  by  free  persons,  who  are  not  under  our 
subjection,  nor  possessed  by  us  bona  fide:  neither  can  we  acquire 
property  by  another's  slave,  of  whom  we  have  neither  the  usufruct, 
nor  the  just  possession.    And  this  is  meant,  when  it  is  said,  that 
nothing  can  be  acquired  by  means  of  a  stranger;  which  we  must 
understand  with  an  exception ;  for  it  hath   been  determined  ac- 
cording to  the  constitution  of  the  emperor  Severus,  that  possession 
may  be  acquired  for  us  by  a  free  person,  as  for  instance  by  a  proc- 
tor, not  only  with,  but  even  without  our  knowledge ;  and,  by  this 
possession,  the  property  may  be  gained,  if  the  delivery  was  "made 
by  the  proprietor ;  and  an  usucapion  or  prescription  may  be  ac- 
quired, although  the  delivery  was  made  by  one,  who  was  not 
the  proprietor. 

VII.  The  observations,  which  we  have  already  made,  concern- 
ing the  acquisition  of  particular  things,  may  suffice  for  the  present ; 
for  we  shall  treat  more  opportunely  hereafter  in  another  place  of 
the  rights  of  legacies  and  trusts.      We  will  now  proceed  to.shew, 
how  things  maybe  acquired  per  universitatem,  that  is,  wholly 
aud  in  gross  by  one  single  acquisition :  for  example;  itTitius  is 


B.  II..T..X. OF  JUSTINIAN.    " 75 

nominated  an  heir,  or  seeks  the  possession  of  the  goods  of  an- 
other, or  arrogates  any  one  as  his  son,  or  if  goods  are  ad- 
judged to  him  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  liberty  of  slaves  ;  in 
all  these  cases,  the  intire  inheritance  passes  to  Titius.  Let  us 
now,  therefore,  inquire  into  inheritances,  which  are  of  a  twofold 
nature  ;  for  they  proceed  either  from  a  testacy,  or  an  intestacy. 
We  will  first  treat  of  those,  which  come  to  us  by  testament;  and, 
in  doing  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  begin  by  explaining  the 
manner  of  making  testaments. 


TITLE  X, 
OF  WILLS, 
Etymology. 

A  testament  is  so  called  from  the  latin  word  testatio',   because 
Jt  bears  witness  or  testimony  to  the  determination  of  the  mind. 
Of  Antient   Wills. 

I.  Biit,  lest  the  antient  usage  should  be  forgotten,  it  is  necessary 
to  observe,  that  two  kinds  of  testaments  were  formerly  in  use ; 
the  one  was  practised  in  times  of  peace,  and  named  calatis  comi- 
tiis\  because  it  was  made  in  a  full  assembly  of  the  people ;  and 
the  other  was  used,  when  the  people  were  going  forth  to  battle, 
and  was  stiled  procinctum  testamentum.     But  a  third  species  was 
afterwards  added,  which  was  called  per  ces  et  lib-ram,  because  it 
was  effected  by  emancipation,  which  was  an  alienation,  made-by 
an  imaginary  sale  in  the  presence  of  five  witnesses,  and  the  libri* 
pens  or  balance-holder,  all  citizens  of  Rome  above  the  age  of 
fourteen,   and  also  in  the  presence  of  him,  who  was  called   the 
€mptor  families  or  purchaser.    The  two  former  kinds  of  testa* 
ments  have  been  disused  for  many  ages;   and  that,  which  was 
made  per  ces  et  libram,  although  it  continued  longer  in  practice, 
hath  now  ceased  in  part  to  be  observed. 

Of  the  Honorary  or  Prcetorian  Will. 

II.  The  three  kinds  of  testaments  before  mentioned  all  took 
their  rise  from  the  civil  law ;  but  afterwards  another  species  was 
introduced  by  the  edict  of  the  praetor ;  for,  by  the  honorary  or 
praetorian  edict,  the  signature  of  seven  witnesses  was  decreed  suf- 
ficient to  establish  a  will  without  any  emancipation  or  imaginary 
sale;   but  this  signature  of  witnesses  was  not  required  by  the 
civil  law. 

Of  the  Union  of  Civil  and  Prcetorian  Law. 

III.  When  the  civil  and  praetorian  laws  began  to  be  blended 
together  partly  by  usage,  and  partly  by  the  emendation,  made  by 


^ THE  INSTITUTES   B.  IT.  t;  *. 

the  imperial  constitutions,  it  became  an  established  rule,  that  all 
testaments  should  be  made  at  bne  and  the  same  time  according  to 
the  civil  law:  that  they  should  be  sealed  by  seven  witnesses  ac- 
cording to  the  praetorian  law,  and  that  they  should  also  be  sub- 
scribed by  the  witnesses,  in  obedience  to  the  constitutions.  Thus 
the  law  concerning  testaments  seems  to  be  tripartite:  for  the  civil 
law  inforces  the  necessity  of  having  witnesses  to  make  a  testament 
valid,  who  must  all  be  present  at  one  and  the  same  time  without 
interval;  the  sacred  constitutions  ordain,  that  every  testament 
must  be  subscribed  by  the  testator  and  the  witnesses ;  and  the 
praetorian  edict  requires  seal  ing,  and  fixes  the  number  of  witnesses. 
Solemnity  added  by  Justinian. 

IV.  To  all  these  solemities  we  have  made  an  addition  for  the 
better  security  of  testaments  and  the  prevention  of  frauds,  haying 
enacted   by  our  constitution,  that  the  name  of  the  heir  shall  be 
expressed,  by  the  hand-writing  either  of  the  testator,  or  of  the 
witnesses;  and  that  every  thing  shall  be  done  in  conformity  to  the 
tenor  of  our  ordinance. 

Of  Seals. 

V.  Every  witness  to  a  testament,  according  to  Papinian,  may 
iiHe  the  same  signet :  for  otherwise,  what  must  be  the  consequence, 
if deven  seals  should  happen  ill  to  bear  the  same  device?    It  is 
ftteo  allowable  to  seal  with  the  signet  of  another. 

Who  may  be  Witnesses. 

\  Thp^e  persons  are  allowed  to  be  good  witnesses,  who  are, 
trjemselves  legally  capable  of  taking  by  testament:  but  yet  nq 
Tfc'oriian,  slave,  or  interdicted  prodigal,  no  person  under  puberty, 
'  mu^»  or  ^ea*»  n°rany  one,  whom  the  laws  have  reprobate^ 

rendered  intestable,  can  be  admitted  a  witness  to  a  testament, 

t          >  ••      -•  •»<  ' 

Of  a  Slave  reputed  to  be  Free, 

If  a  witness,  at  the  time  of  attesting,  was  reputed  to  have 
been  a  free  person,  but  afterwards  appeared,  to  have  been  a  slave 
't  that  time,  the  emperor  Adrian,  declared  in  his  rescript  to  Cdto, 
find  afterwards  the  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  by  their  res- 
cript decreed  in  a  similar  case,  that  they  would  aid  such  a  defect 
in i  k  testament,  and  cause  it  to  be  accounted  equally  firm,  as  if  it 
hSd  been  made,  as  it  ought ;  if  the  witness,  at  the  time  of  sealing, 
vas,  m  the  estimation  of  all  men,  taken  to  be  a  free  person,  no 
one  Saving  made  a  question  of  his  condition. 

Of  two  of  mote  Witnesses  of  the  same  Family. 
Jv  III.  A  father  and  a  son  under  his  power,  or  two  brothers, 
under  the  power  of  the  s^rne  father,  may  be  made  witnesses  to 


B.  ii.  T.  x.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  77 

a  testament:  for  nothing  hinders,  but  that  several  persons  may  be 
admitted  witnesses,  out  of  the  same  family,  to  a  business,  in  which 
that  family  is  not  interested. 

Of  the  Family  of  the  Testator, 

IX.  No  person  can  be  a  witness  to  a  testament,  who  is  under 
the  power  of  the  testator.    And,  if  the  son  of  a  family  gives  away 
his  military  estate  by  testament  after  his  dismission  from  the  army, 
neither  his  father,  nor  any  one  under  the  power  of  his  father,  can 
_be  admitted  a  witness  to  it.     For,  in  this  case,  the  law  does  not 
allow  of  a  domestic  testimony. 

Of  the  Heir. 

X.  No   heir  can   be  admitted  a  witness  to  that  testament,  by 
which  he  is  appointed  heir;  neither  can  the  testimony  of  any  one 
be  admitted,  who  is  in  subjection  to  such  heir ;  nor  the  testimony 
ibt  his  father,  to  whom  he  is  himself  under  subjection  ;  nor  the 
testimony  of  his  brothers,  if  they  are  under  the  power  of  the  same 
father;  for  this  whole  business,  which  is  performed  for  the  sake 
of  completing  a  testament,  is  now  always  transacted  between  the 
testator, and  the  real  or  very  heir.     But  formerly  there  was  great 
.confusion  ;  for  although  the  antients  would  never  admit  the  testU 
mony  of  the  emptor  families,  or  the  supposed  heir,  nor  of  any  one 
allied  to  him  by  subjection,  yet  they  admitted  that   of   the  real 
heir,  and  of  those,  who  were  connected  with  him  by  subjection  ; 
knd  the  only  precaution  taken  was  to  exhort  and  persuade  those 
persons  not  to  abuse  their  privilege.    But  we  have  corrected  this 
practice,  preventing  by  the  coercion  of  law  that,  which  theantient 
lawyers  endeavoured  to  prevent  by  persuasion  only  :  for  we  per- 
tnit  neither  the  real  heir,  who  represents  the  emptor  families  of 
the  antients,  nor  any  person  allied  to  such  real  heir,  to  be  a  wit- 
ness to  the  testament,  by  which  he  was  nominated.     And  it  is  for 
this  reason,  that  we  have  not  suffered  the  old  constitutions  to  be 
inserted  in  our  Code. 

Of  Legataries  and  Trustees. 

XI.  But  we  refuse  not  the  testimony  of  legataries  and  trustees, 
and  of  those,  who  are  allied  to   them  ;  because  such  persons  are 
not  universal  heirs  or  successors :  and,   by  virtue  of  our  constitu- 
tion, we  have  even  specially  granted  to  all  legataries  and  trustees 
ihe  liberty  of  bearing  testimony;  and  therefore  we  grant  this  per- 
mission  much  more  readily  to  those,  who  are  in  subjection  to  them^ 
and  to  those,  to  whom  they  are  subject. 

.      Of  the  Material  of  the  Will. 

XII.  It  is  immaterial,  whether  a  testament  is  written  upon  a 
Jablet  of  wax,  upon  paper,  parchment,  or  any  other  substance. 


78  THE  INSTITUTES B.  11.  T.  xi. 

Of  the  plurality  of  Tablets. 

XIIL  Any  person  may  commit  the  same  testament  to  diverse 
tablets,  each  of  which  will  be  an  original,  if  the  requisite  formg 
are  observed.  And  this  sometimes  is  necessary  ;  as  when  a  man, 
who  is  going  a  sea-voyage,  is  desirous  to  carry  his  will  with  him, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  leave  a  counter-part  of  it  at  home  for  his 
better  security.  Innumerable  other  reasons  for  doing  this  may 
arise,  according  to  the  various  necessities  of  mankind. 
Of  the  Nuncupative  Testament. 

XIV.  What  we  have  already  said  concerning  written  testa- 
ments, is  sufficient.  But  if  any  man  is  willing  to  dispose  of  his 
effects  by  a  nuncupative  testament;  i.e.  by  a  testament  without 
writing,  let  him  be  assured,  if,  in  the  presence  of  seven  witnesses, 
he  declares  his  will  by  word  of  mouth,  that  such  verbal  declara- 
tion will  be  a  complete  and  valid  testament  according  to  the 
civil  law. 


TITLE  XL 

r 

OF  THE  MILITARY  TESTAMENT. 
Formalities  dispensed  with  in  Military  Wills. 

THE  before-mentioned  strict  observation  of  formalities,  in  the 
construction  and  formation  of  testaments,  is  dispensed  with  by 
the  imperial  constitutions,  in  regard  to  all  military  persons,  on 
account  of  their  unskilfu|ness  in  these  matters.  For,  although 
they  neither  call  the  legal  number  of  witnesses,  nor  observe  any 
other  solemnity,  yet  they  may  make  a  good  testament,  if  they  are 
actually  upon  service  against  an  enemy.  This  was  introduced  by 
our  own  ordinance  with  good  reason  ;  and  thus,  in  whatever  man- 
ner the  testament  of  a  military  person  is  conceived,  whether  in 
writing,  or  not  in  writing,  it  prevails  according  to  his  intention: 
but,  when  soldiers  are  not  upon  an  expedition,  and  live  in, their 
own  houses  or  elsewhere,  they  are  by  no  means  entitled  to  claim 
this  privilege ;  but  a  soldier,  who  is  upon  actual  service  against  an 
enemy,  may  make  a  testament,  although  he  is  the  son  of  a  family, 
and  consequently  under  power;  but,  according  to  the  common 
and  general  law,  he  must  observe  all  the  formalities,  which  are 
required  of  others,  who  are  not  soldiers,  when  they  make  their 
testaments. 

Rescript  of  Trajan. 

I.  The  emperor  Trajan  wrote,  as  follows,  in  his  rescript  to 
Catilius  Severus  concerning  military  testaments.  "  The  privilege, 
which  is  given  to  military  persons,  that  their  testaments,  in  what- 


».  n.  T.XI.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  79 

ever  manner  made,  shall  be  valid,  must  be  understood  with  this 
proviso,  that  it  ought  first  to  be  apparent,  that  a  testament  was 
made  in  some  manner :  and  here  observe,  that  a  testament  may 
be  made  without  writing,  even  by  -a  person,  who  is  not  in  the 
army.  And  therefore,  if  it  appears,  that  the  soldier,  concerning; 
whose  goods  question  is  now  made  before  you,  did,  in  the  presence 
of  witnesses,  purposely  called,  declare  what  person  should  be 
his  heir,  and  upon  what  slave,  or  slaves,  he  would  confer  the  bene- 
fit of  liberty,  he  shall  be  reputed  to  have  made  his  testament 
without  writing,  and  his  will  shall  be  ratified.  But,  if  it  is  only 
proved,  that  he  said  to  some  one,  as  it  often  happens  in  discourse, 
I  appoint  you  my  heir  —  or — /  leave  you  all  my  estate,  such 
words  do  not  amount  to  a  testament.  Nor  are  any  persons  more 
interested  than  the  soldiery,  that  words  so  spoken  should  not 
amount  to  a  will;  for,  if  this  was  once  allowed,  witnesses  might 
without  difficulty  be  produced  after  the  death  of  any  military  man, 
who  would  affirm,  that  they  had  heard  him  bequeath  his  estate, 
to  whomever  they  please;  and  thus  the  true  intentions  of  many 
would  be  defeated." 

Of  Mute  and  Deaf  Soldiers. 

,  II.  A  soldier,  though  mute  and  deaf,  may  yet  make  a  testament. 
Of  Soldiers  and  Veterans. 

The  privilege  of  making  testaments  without  the  usual  formali- 
ties was  granted  by  the  imperial  constitutions  to  military  men,  to 
be  enjoyed  only  during  the  time  of  actual  service,  and  whilst 
they  lived  in  their  tents.  For,  if  veterans  after  dismission,  or  even 
soldiers,  if  not  upon  service  against  the  enemy,  would  make  their 
testaments,  they  must  not  omit  the  forms  required  to  be  observed 
in  common  by  all  the  citizens  of  Rome.  And,  if  a  testament  is 
made  by  a  soldier,  even  in  his  tent  upon  an  expedition,  yet,  if  the 
solemnities  of  the  law  are  not  adhered  to,  such  testament  will 
continue  valid  only  for  one  year  after  his  dismission  from  the  army. 
Suppose  therefore,  that  a  soldier  should  die  testate  within  a  year 
after  his  dismission,  and  the  event  of  the  condition,  upon  which 
his  heir  is  instituted,  should  not  happen,  until  after  the  expira- 
tion of  the  year,  would  the  testament  of  such  soldier  be  valid  ? 
We  answer,  that  it  would  prevail  as  a  military  testament. 
Of  a  Will  made  before  Military  Service. 

IV.  If  a  man,  before  his  entrance  into  the  army,  should  make 
his  testament  without  observing  the  requisite  formalities,  and 
afterwards,  when  he  became  a  soldier,  and  was  upon  an  expedition, 
should  open  his  testament  for  the  sake  of  adding  to  it,  or  of  sub- 
tracting something  from  it;  or  if  he  should  cause  it  to  appear 


80 THE  INSTITUTES  B,  n.  T.  x  i  r« 

manifestly  by  any  other  means,  that  he  was  willing  that  his  testa- 
ment should  be  valid,  we  pronounce,  that  it  would  be  valid,  by 
virtue  of  this  new  act,  amounting  to  a  republication  of  his  will. 
Of  a  Soldier  given  in  Ar rogation  or  Emancipation. 

V,  If  a  soldier  is  given  in  arrogation,  or,  being  the  son  of  a 
family,  is  emancipated,  his  testament  is  nevertheless  good,  having 
the  same  effect  as  if  he  had  republished  it  by  a  new  declaration  ; 
for  it  is  by  no  means  invalidated  by  his  change  of  state. 

Of  the  Fictitious  Military  Peculium.  • 

VI.  We  must  here  make  it  known,  that,  since  the  ancient  laws, 
as  well  as  the  latter  constitutions,  have,  in  imitation  of  the  peculi* 
castrensia,  or  military  estates,  given  to  some  persons  peculia  quasi 
castrensiat  or  quasi  military  estates,  and  have  indulged  some  of 
these  in  the  liberty  of  making  testaments,  whilst  they  were  under 
power,  we  therefore,  extending  this  privilege  still  farther,  have 
by  our  ordinance  permitted  all  persons  who  possess  these  estates, 
to  make  their  testaments,  on  condition  that  they  observe  the  com- 
mon solemnities  of  the  law.     But  whoever  thoroughly  inspects 
our  constitution,  will  have  an  opportunity  of  informing  himself 
of  every  point  which  relates  to  the  before-mentioned  privilege. 

TITLE  XII. 

WHO  CANNOT  MAKE  A  WlLL, 

Of  the  Sons  of  a.  Family. 

THE  right  of  making  a  testament  with  effect  is  not  granted  to* 
all  persons  alike:  for  thos^e,  who  are  under  the  power  of  others, 
have  not  this  right :  insomuch  that,  although  parents  have  given 
permission,  their  children  will  not  be  the  more  enabled  by  it  to 
make  a  testament  legally  valid;  if  we  except  such,  whom  we 
have  already  mentioned,  and  principally  those,  who,  on  account 
of  their  being  in  the  army,  h^ye  permission,  by  virtue  of  our 
constitutions,  to  dispose  by  tes, lament  of  .whatever  they  have  acr 
quired  by  military  service,  although  tl)ey  are  still  under  the 
power  of  their  parents.  This  permission  was  at  first  granted  by 
Augustus,  Nerva,  and  that  excellent  prince  Trajan,  to  actual  sol- 
diers only  ;  but  afterwards  it  was  extended  by  the  emperor  Ad- 
rian to  the  veteran,  that  is,  to  those  who  had  received  their  dis- 
mission :  and  therefore,  if  the  son  of  a  family  bequeaths  his  cas- 
trensian  or  military  estate,  it  will  pass  to  him  who  is  instituted 
the  heir;  but,  if  such  son  dies  intestate  without  children  or 
brothers,  his  estate  will  then  pass  of  common  right  to  his  father, 
or  other  paternal  ascendants.  We  may  from  hence  infer,  that 


B.  ii.  T.  xii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  81 

whatever  a  soldier,  although  under  power,  hath  acquired  by  military 
service,  it  cannot  be  taken  from  him  even  by  his  father;  and  that 
the  creditors  of  the  father  can  neither  sell  it,  or  otherwise  disturb- 
the  son  in  his  possession;  and  that  what  is  thus  acquired  is  not 
liable  to  be  shared  in  common  with  brothers,  upon  the  demise  of 
the  father;  but  that  it  remains  the  sole  property  of  him  who  ac- 
quired it :  although  by  the  civil  law  thepeculia  or  estates  of  those, 
who  are  under  power,  are  reckoned  among  the  wealth  of  their 
parents ;  in  the  same  manner  as  thepeculium  of  a  slave  is  esteemed 
the  property  of  his  master.  But  those  estates  must  be  excepted, 
which  by  the  constitutions  of  the  emperors,  and  chiefly  by  our 
own,  are  prohibited  for  diverse  reasons  to  be  acquired  for  parents. 
Upon  the  whole,  if  the  son  of  a  family,  who  is  neither  possessed 
of  a  military  or  quasi-military  estate,  makes  a  testament,  it  will 
not  be  valid,  even  although  he  is  afterwards  emancipated,  and 
becomes  sui  juris  before  his  death. 

Of  Persons  below  the  age  of  Puberty  and  Madmen. 

I.  A  person,  within  the  age  of  puberty,  can  by  no  means  make 
a  good  testament ;    because  he  is  not  supposed  to  possess  that 
judgment  of  mind,  which  is  requisite  :  and  the  same  holds  true  of 
a  madman,  inasmuch  as  he  is  deprived  of  his  senses.     And  the 
testament   of  a  minor   under   puberty   will    not  become  valid, 
although  he  arrives  at  puberty  before  his  death ;  neither  will  the 
testament  of  a  madman  become  valid,  although  he  afterwards 
regains  his  senses,  and  then  dies.     But,  if  he  makes  his  testament, 
during  a  lucid  interval,  he  is  a  legal  testator;  since  it  is  certain, 
that  the  testament,  which  a  man  hath  made,  before  the  malady  of 
madness  has  seized  upon  him,  is  good:  fora  subsequent  fit  of 
phrensy  can  neither  destroy  the  force  of  a  regular  testament,  nor 
the  validity  of  any  other  transaction,  in  which  the  rules  of  the 
law  have  been  punctually  observed. 

Of  Prodigals.    "^. 

II.  A  prodigal  also,  who  is  under  an  interdiction,  and  prohibited 
from  having  the  management  of  his  own  affairs,  can  not  make  a 
testament:  but,  if  he  hath  bequeathed  his  estate  before  interdic- 
tion, his  testament  will  be  valid. 

Of  the  Deaf  and  Dumb. 

III.  A  man  deaf  and  dumb  is  not  always  capable  of  making  a 
testament :   but  we  would  be  understood  to  mean  this  of  him, 
who  is  so  deaf  as  to  be  unable  to  hear  at  all,  and  not  of  him,  who 
is  afflicted  only  with  a  thickness  of  hearing;  and  of  him,  who  is 
so  dumb,  as  to  be  totally  deprived  of  utterance,  and  not  of  him, 

VOL.  1.  No.  5.  L 


83  THE  INSTITUTES.  B.  n.  T.  xm. 

who  only  labors  under  a  difficulty  of  speech :  for  it  often  happens, 
that  the  most  literate  persons  lose  the  faculty  of  hearing  and  speak- 
ing by  various  misfortunes;  we  have  therefore  published  a  consti- 
tution, which  aids  all  such  persons ;  so  that  in  certain  cases  they 
may  make  testaments,  if  they  observe  the  rules  of  our  ordinance, 
and  may  do  many  other  acts,  which  are  there  permitted.  But,  if 
any  man,  after  making  his  testament,  becomes  either  deaf  or  mute 
by  reason  of  ill  health  or  any  other  accident,  his  testament  will 
notwithstanding  this  remain  good. 

Of  the  Blind. 

IV.  A  blind  man  is  not  allowed  to  have  the  power  of  making  a 
testament,  unless  he  observes  those  rules,  which  the  law  of  the 
emperor  Justin,  our  father,  has  introduced. 

Of  Captives. 

V.  The  testament  of  him,  who  is  in  the  hand  of  an  enemy,  is- 
not  valid,  if  it  was  made  during  his  captivity;   even  although  he 
lives  to  return.     But  a  testament,  made  by  a  man  in  the  city,  or 
before  captivity,  is  good,  either  by  virtue  of  thejuspostliminii,  if 
the  prisoner  returns;  or  by  virtue  of  the  law  Cornelia,  if  he  die* 
a  captive. 

TITLE  XIII. 
OF  THE  DISINHERITING  OF  CHILDREN. 

Antient  Law. 

THE  solemnities  of  law,  which  we  have  before  explained,  are 
not  alone  sufficient  to  make  a  testament  valid.  For  he,  who  has  a 
son  under  his  power,  should  take  care  either  to  institute  him  his 
heir,  or  to  disinherit  him  nominally :  for,  if  a  father,  in  his  testa- 
ment, pretermits  or  passes  over  his  son  in  silence,  the  testament 
will  have  no  effect.  And  even  if  the  son  dies,  living  the  father, 
yet  no  one  can  take  upon  himself  the  heirship  by  virtue  of  that 
testament,  inasmuch  as  it  was  null  from  the  very  beginning.  But 
the  antients  did  not  observe  this  rule  in  regard  to  daughters  and 
grand-children  of  either  sex,  though  descended  from  the  male 
line;  for  although  these  were  neither  instituted  heirs,  nor  disin- 
herited, yet  the  testament  was  not  invalidated ;  because  a  right  of 
accretion  intitled  them  to  a  certain  portion  of  the  inheritance: 
parents  were  therefore  not  necessitated  to  disinherit  these  children 
nominally,  but  might  do  it  inter  cceteros.  A  child  is  nominally 
disinherited,  if  the  words  of  the  will  are,  let  Titius  my  son  be  dis- 

i/ihcrited;  or  even  thus let  my  son  be  disinherited,  without  the 

addition  of  any  proper  name,  on  supposition,  that  the  testator  had 
no  other  son  living. 


ii.  T.  xiii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  83 


Of  Posthumous  Children. 

I.  Also  posthumous  children  should  either  be  instituted  heirs, 
or  disinherited  ;  and  in  this  the  condition  of  all  children  is  equal : 
but,  if  a  posthumous  son,  or  any  posthumous  descendent  in  the 
right  line,  whether  male  or  female,  is  pretermitted  in  a  testament, 
such  testament  will  nevertheless  be  valid  at  the  time  of  making; 
but,  by  the  subsequent  birth  of  a  child  of  either  sex,  it  will  be 
annulled.    And  therefore,  if  a  matron,  from  whom  there  is  reason 
•to  expect  a  posthumous  child,  should  miscarry,  nothing  can  pre- 
Tent  the  written  heirs  from  entering  upon  the  inheritance.     But 
female  posthumous  children  may  be  either  nominally  disinherited, 
or  inter  cccteros  by  a  general  clause ;  yet,  if  they  are  disinherited 
inter  cceteros,  something  must   be   left  them  to  shew,  that  they 
were  not  omitted  through  forgetfulness.     But  male  posthumous 
children,  i.  e.  sons,  and  their  descendents  in  the  direct  line,  can- 
not be  disinherited  otherwise,  than  nominally  in  this  form 

whatever  son  is  hereafter  born  to  me,  I  disinherit  him. 

Of  Children  as  it  were  Posthumous. 

II.  Those  also  are  reckoned  in  the  place  of  posthumous  child* 
ren,  who,  succeeding  in  the  stead  of  proper  heirs,  become,  by  a 
quasi-birth,  proper  heirs  to  their  parents  :  for  example,  if  Titius 
has  a  son  under  his  power,  and   by  him  a  grandson,  or  grand- 
daughter, then  would  the  son,  because  he  is  first  in  degree,  have 
the  sole  right  of  a  proper  heir,  although  the  grandson,  or  grand- 
daughter by  that  son,  is  under  the  same  parental  power.     But,  if 
the  son  of  Titius  should  die  in  his  father's  life-time,  or  should  by 
any  other  means  cease  to  be  under  his  father's  power,  the  grand- 
son or  grand-daughter  would  succeed  in  his  place,  and  would 
thus,  by  what  may  be  called  a  quasi-birth,  obtain  the  right  of  a 
proper  heir.     Therefore,  as  it  behoves  a  testator  for  his  own  se- 
curity, either  to  institute  or  disinherit  his  son,  lest  his  testament 
should  be  deemed  not  legal,  so  it  is  equally  necessary  for  him 
either  to  institute  or  disinherit  his  grandson  or  grand-daughter 
by  that  son,  lest,  if  his  son  should  die  in  his  (the  testator's)  life- 
time, his  grandson  or  grand-daughter,  succeeding  to  the  place  of 
his  son,  should  make  void  his   testament  by  a  ^wa^-agnation. 
And  this  has  been  introduced  by  the  law  Julia  Vellia,  in  which 
is  set  forth  a  form  of  disinheriting  g^tzsi-posthumous  children, 
Similar  to  that  of  disinheriting  posthumous  children, 

Of  Emancipated  Children. 

III.  In  regard  to  emancipated  children,  the  civil  law  does  not 
make  it  necessary,  either  to  institute  them  heirs  or  to  disinherit 
tjiern  in  a  testament;  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  mi  hccredcs,  i.  e» 


84 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  r.  xm. 


proper  heirs.  But  the  praetor  commands,  that  all  children  in 
general,  whether  male  or  female,  if  they  are  not  instituted  heirs, 
shall  be  disinherited;  the  males  nominally;  the  females  inter  ca>- 
teros:  for,  if  children  have  neither  been  instituted  heirs,  nor  pro- 
perly disinherited  in  the  manner,  which  we  have  mentioned,  the 
praetor  gives  them  the  possession  of  the  goods,  contrary  to  the 
disposition  of  the  testament. 

Of  Adopted  Children. 

IV.  Adopted  children,  as  long  as  they  continue  under  the  power 
of  their  adoptive  father,  are  intitled  to  the  same  rights,  as  children 
born  in  lawful  matrimony:   and   therefore  they  must  either  be 
instituted  heirs,  or  disinherited,  according  to  the  rules  laid  down 
in  regard  to  natural  and  lawful  children.     But  it  is  neither  enacted 
by  the  civil  law,  nor  enjoined  by  praetorian  equity,  that  children 
emancipated  by  an  adoptive  father,  should  be  numbered  among 
his  natural  children,  so  as  to  partake  of  their  rights:  whence  it 
happens,  that  adopted  children,  as  long  as  they  continue  in  adop- 
tion, are  reputed  strangers  to  their  natural  parents,  who  are  not 
necessitated  either  to  institute  them  heirs,  or  to  disinherit  them: 
but,  when  they  are  emancipated  by  their  adoptive  father,  they  are 
then  in  the  same  state,  in  which  they  would  have  been,  if  they 
had  been  emancipated  by  their  natural  father. 

New  Law. 

V.  These  were  the  rules,  which  the  antient  lawyers  introduced. 
But  we  (not  thinking,  that  any  distinction  can  reasonably  be  made 
between  the  two  sexes,  inasmuch  as  they  both  contribute  alike  to 
the  procreation  of  the  species,  and  because,  by  the  antient  law  of 
the  twelve  tables,  all  children,  male  as  well  as  female,  were  equally 
called  to  the  succession  ab  intcstato,  which  law  the  praetors  seem 
afterwards  to  have  followed)  have  by  our  constitution  introduced 
the  same  law  in  regard  both  to  sons  and  daughters,  and  to  all  the 
other  descendents  in  the  male  line,  whether  in  being,  or  posthu- 
mous; so  that  all  children,  whether  they  are  proper  heirs  or  eman- 
cipated, must  either  be  instituted  heirs  or  nominally  disinherited. 
And,  in  regard  to  adopted  children,  we  have  introduced  certain 
regulations,  which  are  contained  in  our  constitution  of  adoptions. 

Of  the  Testament  of  a  Soldier. 

VI.  If  a  soldier  makes  his  testament,  whilst  he  is  upon  a  mili- 
tary expedition,  and  neither  nominally  disinherits  his  children 
already  born,  nor  his  posthumous  children,  but  passes  them  over 
in  silence,  although  it  is  known  to  him,  that  he  has  such  children, 
or  that  his  wife  was  enceinte,  it  is  provided  by  the  constitutions 
of  the  emperors,  that  such  silence  shall  be  of  equal  force  with  a 
nominal  disinherison. 


B.  ii.  T.  xiii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  85 


Of  the  Testament  of  a  Mother  or  maternal  Grand-father. 
VII.  Neither  a  mother,  nor  a  grandfather  on  the  mother's  suje, 
is  under  any  necessity  of  either  instituting  their  children  heirs,  or 
of  disinheriting  them,  but  may  pass  them  by  in  silence;  for  the 
silence  of  a  mother,  a  maternal  grandfather,  and  of  all  other  as- 
cendents on  the  mother's  side,  works  the  same  effect,  as  an  actual 
disinherison  by  a  father.  For  a  mother  is  not  obliged  to  disinherit 
her  children,  if  she  does  not  think  proper  to  institute  them  her 
heir&;  neither  is  a  maternal  grandfather  under  a  necessity  either 
of  instituting  or  disinheriting  his  grandson  or  grand-daughter  by 
a  daughter;  inasmuch  as  this  is  not  required  either  by  the  civil 
law,  or  the  edict  of  the  praetor,  which  gives  the  possession  of 
goods  contra  tabulas  (i.  e.  contrary  to  the  disposition  of  the  testa- 
ment) to  those  children,  who  have  been  passed  over  in  silence. 
But  children,  in  this  case,  are  not  without  a  remedy  against  the 
testament  of  their  mother  or  maternal  grandfather,  which  shall  be 
shewed  hereafter. 

TITLE  XIV. 
OF  APPOINTING  HEIRS. 

Who  may  be  appointed  Heirs. 

A  man  may  appoint  slaves,  as  well  as  freemen,  to  be  his  heirs 
by  testament;  and  may  nominate  the  slaves  of  another  as  well  as 
his  own:  yet,  according  to  the  opinion  of  many,  no  master  could 
formerly  institute  his  own  slaves  to  be  his  heirs,  without  giving 
them  their  liberty:  but,  at  present,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution, 
masters  may  appoint  their  proper  slaves  to  be  their  heirs,  without 
making  even  any  mention  of  liberty  :  and  this  we  have  introduced, 
not  for  the  sake  of  innovation,  but  because  it  seemed  most  just; 
and  because  Paulus,  in  his  commentaries  upon  Sabinus  and  Plau- 
tius,  affirms,  that  this  was  also  the  opinion  of  Atilicinus.  Here 
note,  that  we  call  a  slave  proprius  servus,  if  the  testator  had  only 
a  nude  property  in  him,  the  usufruct  being  in  another.  But,  in 
a  constitution  of  the  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus,  there  is  a 
case,  in  which  a  slave  was  not  permitted  to  be  instituted  an  heir 
by  his  owner,  although  his  liberty  was  expressly  given  to  him. 

The   words  of  the  constitution  are  these It  is  consonant  to 

right  reason,  that  no  slave,  accused  of  adultery  with  his  mistress, 
shall  be  allowed,  before  a  sentence  of  acquital,  to  be  made  free  by 
that  mistress,  who  is  alleged  to  be  a  partner  in  the  crime.  It 
therefore  follows,  that,  if  a  mistress  institutes  such  a  slave  to 

be  her  heir,  the   institution  is   of  no   avail. The   expression 

ylienus  servus  (i.  e.  the  slave  of  another,}  is  also  sometimes  used  to 
denote  him,  of  whom  the  testator  had  the  usufruct,  though  not 
the  property. 


g(5  THE  INSTITUTES B.  11.  T.  xnr. 

Of  Slaves  appointed  Heirs. 

I.  When  a  slave  hath  been  instituted  by  his  master,  and  re- 
mains in  the  same  state,  he  will  obtain  his  freedom  at  the  death  of 
his  master,  by  virtue  of  the  testament,  and  become  his  necessary 
heir.     But,  if  that  slave  is  manumitted  in  the  life-time  of  his  mas- 
ter,  it  is  in  his  power  either  to  accept  or  refuse  the  inheritance  ; 
for  he  will  not  become  a  necessary  heir,  as  he  can  not  be  said  to 
have  obtained  both  his  liberty  and  the  inheritance,  by  virtue  of 
the  testament.    But,  if  such  instituted  heir  should  be  aliened,  he 
can  not  then  enter  upon  the  inheritance  but  at  the  command  of 
his  new  master,  who  by  means  of  his  slave  may  become  the  heir 
of  the  testator.     For  a  slave,  who   hath  been  aliened,  can  not 
afterwards  obtain  his  liberty,  or  take  an  inheritance  to  his  own 
use,  by  virtue  of  the  testament  of  that  master,  who  made  the  ali- 
enation, although  his  freedom  was  expressly  given  by  such  testa- 
ment: because  a  master,  who  has  aliened  his  slave,  seems  to  have 
departed  from  having  any  intention  to  infranchise  him.      And, 
when  the  slave  of  another  is  appointed  an  heir,  but  remains  in  the 
same   condition,  he  can  not  take   the  inheritance,  but   by   his 
master's  order ;  and,  if  the  slave  is  aliened  in  the  lifetime  of  the 
testator,  or  even  after  his  death,  at  any  time  before  he  has  actually 
taken  the  inheritance,  he  must  then  either  accept,  or  refuse  it,  at 
the  command  of  his  new  master.     But,  if  the  slave  is  infranchised, 
living  the  testator,  or  after  his  death,  before  he  has  accepted  the 
heirship,  he  either  may,  or  may  not,  enter  upon  the  inheritance 
at  his  own  option, 

Of  Slaves  become  Heirs. 

II.  The  slave  of  another  may  legally  be  instituted  an  heir, 
after  the  death  of  his  master;  for  the  slaves  of  an  inheritance,  not 
entered  upon,  are  intitled  to  i\\efactio  passiva  testamenti,  i.  e.  are 
capable  of  taking,  though  not  of  giving,  by  testament;  and  the 
reason  of  this  is,  because  an  inheritance,  which  is  open,  and  not  as 
yet  entered  upon,  is  supposed  to   represent  the  person  of  the 
deceased,  arid  not  the  person  of  the  future  heir:   and  thus  the 
slave  even  of  a  child  in  the  womb  may  be  constituted  ap  heir, 

Of  the  Slave  of  many  Masters. 

III.  If  the  slave  of  many  masters,  who  are  all  capable  of  taking 
by  testament,  is  instituted  an  heir  by  a  stranger,  then  that  slave 
acquires  a  part  of  the  inheritance  for  each  master,  who  commanded 
him  to  take  it,  according  to  their  several  proportions  of  property. 

Of  a  Plurality  of  Heirs. 

IV.  A  testator  may  appoint  one  heir,  or  as  many  heirs  as  he 
pleases  in  infinitum. 


a.  it.  T.  xiv.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  8? 


Of  the  Division  of  an  Inheritance. 

V.  An  inheritance  is  generally  divided  into  twelve  uncice,  that 
is,  parts  or  ounces,  all  which  are  comprehended  under  one  total, 
termed  an  As :  and  each  of  these  parts,  from  the  uncia  to  the  As, 
has  it's  peculiar  name  ;  viz. 

Sextans a  sixth  part,  or  two  ounces. 

Quadrans a  fourth,  or  three  ounces. 

Triens a  third,  or  four  ounces. 

Qnincunx five  ounces. 

Semis a  moity,  or  six  ounces. 

Septunx seven  ounces. 

Bes two  thirds,  or  8  ounces ;  quasi  bis  triens. 

Dodrans nine  ounces,  or  three  fourths;    quasi,  dempto 

quadra?ite,  As. 

Dextans ten  ounces ;  quasi,  dempto  sextante,  As. 

Deunx eleven   ounces  out  of  twelve ;   quasi,  demptd 

uncia,  As. 

But  it  is  not  necessary,  that  an  As,  or  total,  should  always  be 
divided  into  twelve  parts ;  for  an  As  may  consist  of  what  parts 
the  testator  pleases;  and,  if  a  man  names  but  one  heir,  and 
appoints  him  ex  semissc,  i.  e.  the  heir  of  six  parts;  yet  the  whole 
As  will  be  included ;  for  no  man  can  die  partly  testate  and  partly- 
intestate,  except  a  soldier,  whose  intention  is  solely  to  be  regarded. 
And  a  testator  may  also  divide  his  estate  into  as  many  parts,  as  he 
thinks  convenient. 

Of  the  respective  Portions. 

VI.  When  a  testator  hath  instituted  many  heirs,  it  is  incumbent 
upon  him  to  make  a  division  of  his  effects,  if  he  does  not  intend, 
that  all  his  heirs  should  share  his  inheritance  in  equal  portions  : 
for,  if  no  distribution  is  made  by  the  testator,  it  is  evident,  that 
all  his  heirs  must  be  equal  sharers.  But  if  the  shares  of  some  of 
the  nominated  heirs  in  a  testament  should  be  expressed,  and  the 
share  or  shares  of  one  or  more  should  be  omitted,  then  he  or  they, 
whose  share  or  shares  had  not  been  specified,  would  be  intitled  to 
the  undisposed  remainder  of  the  inheritance.  But,  if  a  whole  As% 
or  inheritance,  is  given  among  some  of  the  nominated  heirs,  yet 
they,  whose  shares  are  mentioned,  are  intitled  only  to  a  moity; 
and  he  or  they,  whose  shares  are  not  mentioned,  are  called  to  the 
succession  of  the  other  moity.  And,  when  a  whole  inheritance 
is  not  given  away,  it  is  immaterial  whether  an  heir,  whose  share 
is  not  specified,  holds  the  first,  middle,  or  last  place  in  the  nomi- 
nation: for,  whatever  place  he  holds  in  it,  he  is  equally  intitled 
to  the  part  not  bequeathed  in  the  testament. 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  xvii. 

If  any  part  remain  unbequeathed. 

VII.  Let  us  now  inquire,  what  the  law  would  direct,  if  a  part 
of  an  inheritance  should  remain  unbequeathed,  and  yet  a  certain 
portion  of  it  should  be  given  by  testament  to  every  nominated 
heir:  as  if  three  should  be  instituted,  and  a  fourth  given  to  each. 
It  is  clear  in  this  case,  that  the  undisposed  part  would  vest  in  each 
of  them  in  proportion  to  the  share  bequeathed  to  him,  and  that 
each  would  be  reputed  the  written  heir  of  a  third.     And,  on  the 
contrary,  if  many  are  nominated  heirs  in  certain  portions,  so  as  to 
exceed  the  As,  then  each  heir  must  suffer  a  defalcation  pro  rata 

for  example,  if  four  are  instituted,  and  a  third  is  given  to  each, 

then  this  disposition  would  work  the  same  effect,  as  if  each  of 
the  written  heirs  had  been  instituted  to  a  fourth  only. 

If  more  portions  than  twelve  are  bequeathed. 

VIII.  If  more  parts  or  ounces,  than  twelve,  are  bequeathed, 
then  he,  who  is  instituted  without  any  prescribed  share,  shall  be 
intitled  to  what  remains,  of  a  dupondius;  that  is,  of  twenty-four 
parts :  and,  if  more  than  twenty-four  parts  are  bequeathed,  then 
the  heir,  who  is  nominated  without  any  determinate  share,  is 
intitled  to  the  remainder  of  a  tripondius,  i.  e.  of  thirty-six  parts  or 
ounces.    But  all  these  parts  are  afterwards  reduced  to  twelve. 

Of  the  manner  of  instituting  an  Heir. 

IX.  An  heir  may  be  constituted  simply,  or  conditionally but 

not  from  or  to  any  certain  period :  as  if  a  testator  should  say  to 
TitiuSy  be  thou  my  heir  after  five  years  to  be  computed  from  my 

death or -from  the  calends  of  such  a  month or 'till  the 

calends  of  such  a  month.    For  time,  thus  added,  is  in  law  deemed 
superfluous ;  and  such  an  institution  takes  place  immediately,  as 
if  it  was  a  simple  appointment. 

Of  an  impossible  Condition. 

X.  An  impossible  condition  in  the  institution  of  heirs,  the  dis- 
position of  legacies,  the  appointment  of  trusts,  or  the  confermg  of 
liberty,  is  treated  as  unwritten  or  void. 

Of  more  Conditions. 

XI.  If  many  conditions  are  jointly  required  in  the  institution 
of  an  heir;  as  thus,  if  this  thing  and  that  thing  be  done,  then  both 
must  be  complied  with.    But,  if  the  conditions  are  placed  sepa- 
rately and  in  the  disjunctive,  as  thus,  if  this,or  that  be  done,  it  will 
then  be  sufficient  to  obey  either. 

Of  Strangers  to  the  Testator. 

XII.  A  testator  may  appoint  persons,  whom  he  hath  never 
seen,  to  be  his  heirs.    He  may,  for  example,  institute  his  brother's 


B.  ii.  T.  xv.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  89 

sons,  who  are  in  a  foreign  country,  although  he  does  not  know 
where  they  are;  for  the  want  of  this  knowledge  in  a  testator  will 
not  vitiate  the  institution  of  an  heir. 


TITLE  XV. 

OF  VULGAR  SUBSTITUTION. 
Of  Heirs  of  different  Degrees. 
A  man  by  testament  may  appoint  many  degrees  of  heirs;  as 

thus if  Titius  will  not  be  my  heir,  let  Seius  be  my  heir.    And 

he  may  proceed  in  such  a  substitution  as  far  as  he  shall  think 
proper;  and  lastly,  in  default  of  all  others,  he  may  constitute  a 
slave  to  be  his  necessary  heir. 

Of  the  number  of  Heirs  in  different  Degrees. 

I.  A  testator  may  substitute  many  in  the  place  of  one,  or  one  in 
the  place  of  many,  or  one  in  the  place  of  each,  or  he  may  substi- 
tute even  his  instituted  heirs  reciprocally  to  one  another. 

Of  the  Portions  of  the  Substitutes. 

II.  If  a  testator,  having  instituted  several  co-heirs  in  unequal 
portions,  substitutes  them  reciprocally  the  one  to  the  other,  and 
makes  no  mention  of  their  shares  of  the  inheritance  in  the  substi- 
tution, he  seems  to  have  given  the  same  shares  by  the  substitution, 
which  he  gave  by  the  institution;  and  this  is  agreeable  to  the 
rescript  of  the  emperor  Antoninus.  - 

Of  a  Co-heir  substituted. 

III.  If  a  co-heir  is  substituted  to  an  instituted  heir,  and  a  third 
person  is  substituted  to  that  co-heir,  the  emperors  Severus  and 
Antoninus,  have  by  rescript  ordained,  that  such  substituted  person 
shall  be  admitted  to  the  portions  of  both  the  co-heirs  without 
distinction. 

Of  the  Substitute  to  a  Slave. 

IV.  If  a  testator  constitutes  the  slave  of  another  to  be  his  heir, 

supposing  him  to  be  free,  and  adds if  he  does  not  become  my 

heirt  I  substitute  Maevius  in  his  place then,  if  that  slave  should 

afterwards  enter  upon  the  inheritance  at  the  command  of  his 
master,  Mcevius,  the  substitute,  would  be  admitted  to  a  moity. 
For  the  words,  if  he  docs  not  become  my  heir,  in  regard  to  him^ 
whom  the  testator  knew  to  be  under  the  dominion  of  another,  are 
taken  to  mean,  if  he  will  neither  become  my  heir  himself,  nor 
cause  another  to  be  my  heir:    but  in  regard  to  him,  whom  the 
testator  supposed  to  be  free,  they  imply  this  condition  ;  viz.  if  my 
heir  will  neither  acquire  the  inheritance  for  himself,  nor  for  him 
to  whose  dominion  he  may   afterwards  become  subject.     But  it 

VOL.  1.    NO.  5.  M 


90  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xvi. 

was  determined  by  Tiberius,  the  emperor,  in  the  case  of  his  own 
slave  Parthenius,  that  a  substitute  in  such  a  case  should  be 
admitted  to  a  moity. 

TITLE  XVI. 
OF  PUPILLARY  SUBSTITUTION. 

Summary. 

A  parent  can  substitute  to  his  children,  who  are  within  puberty, 
and  under  his  power,  not  only  in  the  manner  before  mentioned, 

which  is   thus  "• if  my  children  will  not  be  my  heirs,  let  some 

other  person  be  my  heir but  he  may  write if  my  children 

actually  become  my  heirs,  but  die  within  puberty,  let  another 
become  their  heir:  for  example:  let  Titius,  my  son,  be  my  heir; 
and,  if  he  either  does  not,  or  does,  become  my  heir,  and  dies  before 
he  ceases  to  be  under  tutelage,  [i.  e.  before  he  arrives  at  the  age  of 
puberty,]  let  Seius  be  my  heir"  And,  in  this  case,  if  the  son  does 
not  enter  upon  the  inheritance,  the  substitute  becomes  heir  to 
the  father ;  and,  if  the  son  takes  the  inheritance,  and  dies  a  pupil 
before  the  age  of  puberty,  the  substitute  is  then  heir  to  the  son. 
For  custom  has  ordained,  that  parents  may  make  wills  for  their 
children,  when  their  children  are  not  at  age  to  make  wills  for 
themselves. 

Of  Substitution  for  Insanes. 

I.  Excited  by  humanity,  and  the  reasonableness  of  the  foregoing 
usage,  we  have  inserted  a  constitution  into  our  Code,  by  which  it 
is  provided,  that,  if  a  man  has  children,  grand-children,  or  great- 
grandchildren, who  are  mad  or  disordered  in  their  senses,  he  may 
make  a  substitution  of  certain  persons  to  such  children,  in  the 
manner  of  a  pupillary  substitution,  although  they  are  arrived  at 
the  age  of  full  puberty.     But  we  have  decreed,  that  this  species 
of  substitution  shall  be  void,  as  soon  as  they  shall  have  recovered 
from  their  disorder;  and  this  we  have  done  in  imitation  of  pupil- 
lary substitution,  which  ceases  to  be  in  force,  when  the  minor 
attains  to  puberty. 

The  property  of  Pupillary  Substitutes. 

II.  In  a  pupillary  substitution,  made  after  the  form  before- 
mentioned,  there  are  in  a  manner  two  testaments,  the  one  of  the 
father,  the  other  of  the  son ;  as  if  the  son  had  instituted  an  heir 
for  himself:  at  least  there  is  in  such  a  substitution,  one  testament 
containing  a  disposition  of  two  inheritances. 

Another  Form, 

III.  If  a  testator  is  apprehensive,  lest,  at  the  time  of  his  death, 
His  son,  being  as  yet  a  pupil,  should  be  liable  to  fraud  and  imposi- 


B.  ii.  *.  xvi, OF  JUSTINIAN. 91 

tion,  if  a  substitute  should  be  publicly  given  to  him,  he  ought  to 
insert  a  vulgar  substitution  in  the  first  tablet  of  his  testament; 
and  to  write  that  substitution,  in  which  a  substitute  is  named,  if 
his  son  should  die  within  puberty ,  in  the  lower  tablet,  which  ought 
to  be  separately  tied  up  and  sealed ;  and  it  also  behoves  the  testa- 
tor to  insert  a  clause  in  the  first  part  of  his  testament,  forbidding 
the  lower  part  to  be  opened,  whilst  his  son  is  alive,  and  within 
the  age  of  puberty.  But,  although  it  is  certain,  that  a  substitution 
to  a  son  within  puberty  is  not  less  valid,  because  it  is  written  on 
the  same  tablet,  in  which  the  testator  hath  appointed  him  to  be 
his  heir,  it  is  however  unsafe  and  dangerous. 
Who  may  Substitute. 

IV.  Parents  are  not  only  allowed  to  give  a  substitute  to  their 
children  within  puberty,  if  such  children  become  their  heirs,  and 
die  within  puberty;  but  parents  are  also  permitted  to  give  a  sub- 
stitute to  their  disinherited  children ;   and  therefore,  whatever  a 
disinherited  child,  within  the  age  of  puberty,  may  have  acquired 
by  inheritances,  by  legacies,  or  by  the  gift  of  relations  and  friends, 
the  whole  will  become  the  property  of  the  substitute.    All,  which 
we  have  hitherto  said  concerning   the  substitution  of  pupils, 
whether  they  are  instituted  heirs,  or  disinherited  children,  is 
understood  to  extend  also  to  posthumous  children. 

Pupillary  Testament. 

V.  No  parent  can  make  a  testament  for  his  children,  unless  he 
hath  made  a  testament  for  himself:  for  the  testament  of  a  child 
within  puberty  is  a  part  and  consequence  of  the  testament  of  the 
parent,  insomuch  that,  if  the  testament  of  the  father  is  not  valid, 
the  testament  of  the  son  will  not  take  effect. 

Each  Child  may  have  a  Substitute. 

VI.  A  parent  may  make  a  pupillary  substitution  to  each  of  his 
children,  or  to  him,  who  shall  die  the  last  within  puberty.     He 
may  substitute  to  each  of  his  children,  if  he  is  unwilling,  that  any 
of  them  should  die  intestate;   and  he  may  substitute  to  the  last, 
who  shall  die  within  puberty,  if  he  is  willing,  that  they  should 
preserve  among  themselves  the  intire  right  of  succession. 

Nominal  or  general  Substitution. 

VII.  A  substitution  may  be  made  to  a  child  within  puberty, 

either  nominally;   as  for  example  " If  my  son  becomes  my 

heir,  and  dies  a  pupil,  let  TITIUS  be  my  heir; or  generally 

thus Whoever  shall  be  my  heir,  let  the  same  person  be  a  sub- 
stitute to  my  son,  if  he  dies  within  puberty."      And,  by  these 
general  words,  all,  who  have  been  instituted,  and  have  taken  upon 


9&  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  xvi. 

them  the  inheritance  of  the  father,  must  be  called,  by  virtue  of 
the  substitution,  to  the  inheritance  of  the  son,  if  he  dies  within 
puberty;  each  being  intitled  to  a  part  of  the  son's  inheritance,  in 
proportion  to  the  share,  which  he  had  in  the  father's. 
How  Pupillary  Substitution  is  finished. 

VIII.  A  pupillary  substitution  may  be  made  to  males,  till  they 
arrive  at  fourteen  complete;  and  to  females,  till  they  have  com- 
pleted their  twelfth  year:  and,  when  they  exceed  either  of  these 
ages,  the  substitution  becomes  extinct 

Who  cannot  receive  a  pupillary  Substitution. 

IX.  A  pupillary  substitution  cannot  be  made  with  effect,  either 
to  a  stranger,  who  is  instituted,  or  even  to  a  son  who  is  instituted, 
if  his  age  exceeds  that  of  puberty.    But  a  testator  may  oblige  his 
heir  to  give  to  another  either  a  part,  or  even  the  whole  of  the 
inheritance,  by  virtue  of  ajidei-commissum,  or  gift  in  trust;  which 
we  will  treat  of  in  it's  proper  place. 

TITLE  XVII. 

How  TESTAMENTS  ARE  DISSOLVED.     + 
A  TESTAMENT,  legally  made,  remains  valid,  until  it  is  either 
broken,  or  rendered  ineffectual. 

How  Testaments  are  broken.    First  by  Adoption. 

I.  A  testament  is  said  to  be  broken,  or  revoked,  when  the  force 
of  it  is  destroyed,  whilst  the  testator  still  remains  in  the  same 
state.    For,  if  a  testator,  after  making  his  testament,  should  arro- 
gate an  independent  person,  by  licence  from  the  emperor,  or,  in 
the  presence  of  the  praetor,  should  adopt  a  child  under  the  power 
of  his  natural  parent,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution,  then  that 
testament  would  be  broken  by  this  quasi-b'irth  of  a  proper  heir. 

Of  Posterior  Testaments.  . 

II.  A  former  testament,  although  legally  perfect,  may  be  broken 
or  revoked  by  a  subsequent  testament ;  nor  is  it  material,  whether 
the  heir,  nominated  in  the  later  testament,  can  or  will  take  the 
heirship  at  the  death  of  the  testator;  for  the  only  thing  regarded 
is,  whether  he  might  have  been  the  heir :  and  therefore,  if  an 
instituted  heir  should  refuse  to  take  the  heirship,  or  should  die, 
living  the  testator,  or  after  his  death,  and  before  he  could  enter 
upon  the  inheritance ;  or  if  he  should  die,  before  the  condition  is 
accomplished,  upon  which  he  was  instituted,  then,  in  any  of  these 
cases,  the  testator  would  die  intestate ;   for  the  first  testament 
would  be  invalid,  being  broken  or  revoked  by  the  second,  and  the 
second  would  be  of  as  little  force,  for  want  of  an  heir. 


B.  ii.  T.  xvii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  $3 

Of  other  Posterior  Testaments. 

III.  If  a  man,  who  has  already  made  a  testament  legally  perfect, 
should  make  a  subsequent  testament  equally  good,  and  institute 
an  heir  in  it  to  some  particular  things  only,  the  emperors  Sevtrus 
and  Antoninus  have  by  rescript  declared,  that,  in  this  case,  the; 
first  will  shall  be  broken  or  revoked,  as  a  testament.     But  we 
have  commanded  the  words  of  this  constitution  to   be  here  in- 
serted.    The  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  to  Cocceius  Cam-' 
panus  "We  determine,  that  a  second  testament,  although  the  heir 
named   in   it  is  not  universal,  but  instituted  to  particular  things 
only,  shall  be  as  good  in  law,  as  if  no  mention  had  been  made  of 
particular  things;  yet  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  the  written 
heir  shall  be  obliged  to  content  himself  either  with  the  thing* 
given  him,  or  with  the  fourth  part,  allowed  by  the  Falcidian  law, 
and  shall  be  bound  to  restore  the  rest  of  the  inheritance  to  the 
heirs  instituted  in  the  first  testament,  on  account  of  the  words,, 
denoting   a  trust,  inserted  in  the  second   testament,  by  whieli 
words  it  is  expressly  declared,  that  the  first  testament  shall  sub- 
sist."  And,  in  this  manner,  a  testament  may  be  said  to   be 

broken  or  cancelled. 

Of  invalidated  Testaments. 

IV.  Testaments,  legally  made,  are  also  invalidated,  if  the  testator 
suffers  diminution,  that  is,  changes  his  condition :  and,  in  the 
first  book  of  our  institutions,  we  have  shewed   by  what  means 
diminution,  or  a  change  of  state,  may  happen. 

Why  so  termed. 

V.  In  the  case  of  diminution,  testaments  are  said  to  become 
irrita,  i.   e.  ineffectual,  although  those,   which  are   broken  oar 
revoked,  and  those,  which,  from,  the  beginning,  were  not  legal,  do 
all  equally  become  ineffectual  (orirrita)  in  reality.     We  may  also 
term  those  testaments  broken,  which  are  at  first  legally  roade^  bcrt 
are  afterwards  rendered  ineffectual,  by  diminution,  or  change  of 
state.     But,  as  it  is  proper,  that  every  particular  defect  should  be 
distinguished  by  a  particular  appellation,  those  testaments,  which 

are  illegal,  are  termed  null ; those  which  were  at  first  legal, 

but  afterwards  lose  their  force,  by  some  revocatory  act  of  the 
testator^  are  said  to  be  rupta,  or  broken ;    and  those,  since  the 
making  of  which,  the  testator  hath  suffered  a  change  of  state,  are 
said  to  be  irrita,  or  ineffectual. 

How  they  may  be  restored. 

VI.  But  a  testament,  which  was  at  first  legally  made,  and  hath 
afterwards  been  rendered   void   by   diminution,   is   not  always 
without  effect;  for  the  written  heir  is  intitled  to  the  possession  of 


94 THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xrii, 

the  goods,  by  virtue  of  the  testament,  if  it  appears,  that  it  was 
sealed  by  seven  witnesses,  and  that  the  testator  was  a  Roman 
citizen,  and  not  under  power,  at  the  time  of  his  death :  but,  if  a 
testament  became  void,  because  the  testator  had  lost  the  right  of 
a  citizen,  or  his  liberty,  or  had  given  himself  in  adoption,  and,  at 
the  time  of  his  death,  still  continued  under  the  power  of  his 
adoptive  father,  then  the  written  heir  could  not  demand  the  pos- 
session of  the  goods,  in  consequence  of  the  testament* 
Of  the  mere  Will  (nuda  Voluntas.J 

VII.  A  testament  can  not  be  invalidated  solely,  because  the  tes- 
tator was  afterwards  unwilling,  that  it  should  subsist;  so  that,  if 
a  man,  after  making  one  testament,  should  begin  another,  and  by 
reason  of  death,  or  change  of  mind,  should  not  proceed  to  per- 
fect that  testament,  it  is  provided  by  the  oration  or  ordinance  of 
the  emperor  Pertinax,  that  the  first  testament  shall  not  be  revoked, 
unless  the  second  is  both  legal  and  perfect;   for  an   imperfect 
testament  is  undoubtedly  null. 

Deficient    Wills. 

VIII.  The  emperor  Pertinax  hath  declared  by  the  same  ordi- 
nance, that  he  would  not  take  the  inheritance  of  any  testator, 

who  left  him  his  heir,  because  a  law-suit  was  depending; that 

he  would  never  establish  a  will,  deficient  in  point  of  form,  if  he 

was  upon  that  account  instituted  the  heir; that  he  would  by 

no  means  suffer  himself  to  be  nominated  an  heir  by  the  mere 
word  of  mouth  of  a  testator ;  and  that  he  would  never  take  any 
emolument  by  virtue  of  any  writing  whatever,  not  authorised  by 
the  strict  rules  of  law.    The  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  have 
also  often  issued  rescripts  to  the  same  purpose:   "for  although" 
say  they, "  we  are  certainly  not  subject  to  the  laws,  yet  we  live 
in  obedience  to  them." 

TITLE  XVIII. 
OF  INOFFICIOUS  WILLS, 
Reason  of  this  Complaint. 

INASMUCH  as  parents  often  disinherit  their  children  without 
cause,  or  omit  to  mention  them  in  their  testaments,  it  has  there- 
fore been  introduced  as  law,  that  children,  who  have  been  unjustly 
disinherited,  or  unjustly  omitted  in  the  testaments  of  their  parents, 
may  com  plain  that  such  testaments  are  inofficious,  under  color  that 
their  parents  were  not  of  sane  mind,  when  they  made  them :  but,  in 
these  cases,  it  is  not  averred  to  be  strictly  true,  that  the  testator  was 
really  mad  or  disordered  in  his  senses,  but  it  is  urged  as  a  merefic- 


B.  ii.  T.  xviii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  95 

tion  only ;  for  the  testament  is  acknowledged  to  have  been  well 
made,  and  the  only  exception  to  it  is,  that  the  testament  is  not  con- 
sistent with  the  duty  of  a  parent.  For,  if  a  testator  was  really  not  in 
his  senses  at  the  time  of  making  his  testament,  it  is  certainly  nulL 
Who  may  lawfully  complain. 

I.  Children  are  not  the  only  persons  allowed  to  complain,  that 
testaments  are  inofficious  ;  for  parents  are  in  like  manner  permit- 
ted to  make  the  same  complaint.     Also  the  brothers  and  sisters  of 
a  testator  are,  by  virtue  of  the  imperial  constitutions,  prefered  to 
infamous  persons,  if  any  such  have  been  instituted  by  the  deceased 
to  be  his  heirs;  but  brothers  and  sisters  are  not  therefore  allowed 
to  make  a  complaint  against  any  heir,  whom  the  testator  shall 
have  instituted.    And  collaterals,  beyond  brothers  and  sisters,  can 
by  no  means  complain  of  the  undutifulness  of  a  testament,  if  their 
right  to  complain  is  opposed ;  but  if  their  right  of  complaining  is 
not  disputed,  and  the  testament  is  annulled,  yet  those  only  can  be 
benefited,  who  are  nearest  in  succession  upon  an  intestacy, 

Adopted  Children. 

II.  Adopted  children,  according  to  the  distinction  taken  in  our 
constitution,  are  admitted,  as  well  as  natural  children,  to  complain 
against  a  testament,  as  inofficious,  if  they  can  obtain  the  effects 
of  the  deceased  no  other  way ;  but  if  they  can  get  the  whole  or  a 
part  of  the  inheritance  by  any  other  means,  they  then  can  not 
bring  a  complaint  of  undutifulness  against  the  testament.     Post- 
humous children  also,  who  are  unable  to  recover  their  inheritance 
by  any  other  method,  are  allowed  to  bring  this  complaint. 

If  the  Testator  has  left  any  Thing. 

III.  What  we  have  hitherto  said  must  be  understood  to  take  place 
only,  when  nothing  has  been  left  by  the  will  of  the  deceased  ;  for, 
if  any  single  thing,  or  the  least  part  of  an  inheritance,  hath  been 
bequeathed  to  those,  who  have  a  right  to  a  fourth  part  or  legitime 
portion  of  the  testator's  estate,  they  are  barred  from  bringing  a 
querele  or  complaint  against  the  testament,  as  undutiful,  but  are 
intitled  by  action  to  recover  whatever  sum  is  wanting  to  complete 
their  legitime,  although  it  was  not  added  by  the  testator,  "that  their 
legitime  portion  should  be  completed  according  to  the  arbitration 
of  some  person  of  an  approved  character/' 

Of  a  Legacy  to  the  Tutor. 

IV.  If  a  tutor  should  accept  a  legacy  in  the  name  of  his  pupil, 
in  consequence  of  a  bequest  made  in  the  testament  of  such  tutor's 
father,  who  left  nothing  to  his  son ;  the  tutor  may  nevertheless 
complain  in  his  own  name  against  the  testament  of  his  father  as 
imdutiful, 


9<5  THE  INSTITUTES B.  11.  T.XIX. 

V.  And,  on  the  contrary,  if  a  tutor  should  bring  a  complaint  of 
undutifulness  in  the  name  of  his  pupil,  against  the  testament  of 
his  pupil's  father,  who  left  nothing  to  his  son,  and  this  testament 
should  be  confirmed  by  sentence,  yet  the  tutor  would  not  after- 
wards be  barred,  on  account  of  this   proceeding,   from  taking 
whatever  was  left  him  in  tha.t  testament,  which  he  controverted 
only  for  the  benefit  of  his  pupil  and  by  virtue  of  his  office. 

Of  the  fourth  or  legitime  Part. 

VI.  No  person,  who  hath  right,  can  be  hindered  from  bringing  a 
complaint  of  undutiulness  unless  he  hath  in  some  manner  received 
his  fourth  or  legitime  part,  as  by  being  appointed  heir,  by  having 
a  legacy,  or  by  means  of  a  trust  for  his  use ;  or  unless  his  legitime 
part  hath  been  given  him  by  donation  propter  mortem,  or  even 
inter  vivos,  (in  those  cases,  of  which  our  constitution  makes  men- 
tion,) or  by  any  other  means  set  forth  in  our  ordinances.     What 
we  have  said  of  the  fourth  or  legitime  is  to  be  so  understood,  that, 
if  there  are  more  persons  than  one,  whb  have  a  rig'ht  to  bring  a 
plaint  of  undutifulness  against  a  testament,  yet  one  fourth  will  be 
sufficient,  divided  among  them  all  in  equal  portions* 


TITLE  XIX. 
OF  THE  QUALITY  AND   DIFFERENCE  OF  INHERITANCES. 

Division  of  Heirs. 

HEIRS  are  divided  into  three  sorts,  called  proper-,  proper  and 
necessary  ;  and  strangers. 

Of  necessary  Heirs. 

I.  A  slave,  instituted  by  his  master,  is  a  necesary  heir ;  and  he 
is  so  called,  because  at  the  death  of  the  testator  he  becomes  in- 
stantly free,  and  is  compellable  to  take  the  heirship;  he  therefore, 
who  suspects  his  circumstances,  commonly  institutes  his  slave 
to  be  his  heir  in  the  first,  second,  or  some  other  place;  so  that, 
if  he  does  not  leave  a  sum  equal  to  his  debts,  the  goods,  which 
are  seized,  sold,  or  divided  among  his  creditors,  may  rather  seem  to 
be  those  of  his  heir  than  his  own.     But  a  slave,  in  recompense  of 
this  dishonour,  is  allowed  to  reserve  to  himself  whatever  he  hath 
acquired  after  the  death  of  his  patron;  for  such  acquisitions  are 
not  to  be  sold,  although  the  goods  of  the  deceased  are  ever  so  in- 
sufficient for  the  payment  of  his  creditors. 

Of  proper  Heirs. 

II.  Proper  and  necessary  heirs  are  sons,  daughters,   grandsons 
or  grand-daughters  by  a  son  or  any  other  descendents  in  the  direct 
line,  who  were  in  the  power  of  the  deceased  at  the  time  of  his 


S,  it.  T.  xix, OF  JUSTINIAN.        97 

death.  But,  in  order  to  constitute  grandchildren  proper  or  domestic 
heirs,  it  does  not  suffice,  that  they  were  in  the  power  of  their 
grandfather  at  the  time  of  his  decease;  but  it  is  requisite,  that 
their  father  should  have  ceased  to  be  a  proper  heir  in  the  life-time 
of  his  father,  by  having  been  freed,  either  by  death  or  some  other 
means,  from  paternal  authority ;  for  then  it  is,  that  the  grandson 
or  grand-daughter  succeeds  in  the  place  of  their  father.  And  note, 
that  heirs  are  called  sui  or  proper,  because  they  are  domestic; 
and  in  the  very  life-time  of  their  father  are  reputed  masters  or 
proprietors  of  the  inheritance  in  a  certain  degree.  Hence  it  is, 
that,  if  a  man  dies  intestate,  his  children  are  preferred  before  all 
others  to  the  succession  ;  and  are  called  necessary  heirs,  because, 
willing  or  unwilling,  they  become  the  heirs  of  their  parent  accord- 
ing to  the  law  of  the  12  tables,  either  by  virtue  of  a  testament  or  in 
consequence  of  an  intestacy.  But,  when  children  request  it,  the 
prretor  permits  them  to  abstain  from  the  inheritance,  that  the 
effects  of  their  parents,  rather  than  their  own,  may  be  seized  by 
the  creditors. 

Of  Strangers. 

III.  But  all  other  heirs,  not  subject  to  the  power  of  the  testator 
at  the  time  of  his  death,  are  called  strangers :  thus  even  children, 
who  are  not  under  the  power  of  their  father,  but  yet  are  consti- 
tuted his  heirs,  are  reckoned  strangers  in  a  legal  sense :  and,  for 
the  same  reason,  children,  instituted  heirs  by  theirmother,  are  also 
reputed  strangers  ;  for  a  woman  is  not  allowed  to  have  her  children 
under  her  own   power.     A  slave  also,  whom  his  master  hath 
instituted  by  testament  and  afterwards  manumitted,  is  numbered 
among  those  heirs,  who  are  called  strangers. 

Of  the  Faction  of  a  Testament. 

IV.  In  regard  to  strangers,  it  is  requisite,  that  they  should  be 
capable  of  the  faction  of  a  testament,  whether  they  are  instituted 
heirs  themselves,  or  whether  those,  under  their  power,  are  insti- 
tuted.    And  this  qualification  is  required  at  two  several  times;— 
at  the  time  of  making  the  testament,  that  the  institution  may  be 
valid;  and  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  that  such  institu- 
tion may  take  effect :  and  farther,  whether  an  heir  is  appointed 
simply  or  conditionally,  yet  he  ought  to  be  capable  of  the  faction 
of  a  testament  at  the  time  of  entering  upon  the  inheritance  ;  for 
his  right  is  principally  regarded  at  the  time  of  acquiring  the  pos- 
session.    But,  in  the  intermediate  time,  between  the  making  of 
the  testament  and  the  death  of  the  testator,  or  the  completion  of 
the  condition  of  the  institution,  the  heir  will  not  be  prejudiced  by 
incapacity  or  change  of  state;  because  the  three  particular  times, 

VOL.  1.  No.  5.  N 


93  THE  INSTITUTES  «•  it.  *. 

which  we  have  mentioned,  are  the  times  to  be  regarded.  But  a 
man,  capable  of  giving  his  effects  by  testament,  is  not  the  only 
person,  who  is  said  to  have  testamenti  factionem  ;  for  whoever  is 
capable  of  taking  for  the  benefit  of  himself,  or  of  acquiring  by 
testament  for  the  benefit  of  another,  is  also  understood  to  have 
the  faction  of  a  testament:  and  therefore  persons  mad,  mute,  or 
posthumous,  also  infants,  the  sons  of  a  family,  or  slaves  not  your 
own,  may  all  be  said  to  have  the  faction  of  a  testament  in  its  pas- 
sive signification.  For,  although  such  persons  are  incapable  of 
making  a  testament,  yet  they  are  capable  of  acquiring  by  testa- 
ment, either  for  themselves  or  others. 

Of  the  Right  of  deliberating. 

V.  Strangers,  who  are  appointed  heirs,   have  the  power  of 
deliberating  whether  they  will,  or  will  not,  enter  upon  an  inherit- 
ance.   But,  if  even  a  proper  or  domestic  heir,  who  has  the  liberty 
of  abstaining,  should  intermeddle,  or,  if  a  stranger,  who  is  per- 
mitted to  deliberate,  should  once  take  an  inheritance,  it  will  not 
afterwards  be  in  his  power  to  renounce  it,  unless  he  was  under 
the  age  of  25  years  :  for  the  praetor,  who  in  all  other  cases  relieves 
minors,  who  have  been  deceived,  affords  them  also  his  assistance, 
when  they  rashly  take  upon  themselves  an  injurious  inheritance. 
And  here  it  must  be  noted,   that  the  emperor  Adrian  once  gave 
permission  to  a  major,  or  person  of  full  age,  to  relinquish  an 
inheritance,  when  it  appeared  to  be  incumbered  with  a  great  debt, 
which  had  been  concealed,  till  the  heir  had  taken  upon  himself 
the  administration.    Bat  this  permission  was  granted  as  a  very 
special  instance  of  beneficence.    The  emperor  Gordian  after- 
wards promulged  a  constitution  for  the  indemnification  of  heirs, 
yet  confined  the  force  of  it  to  those  only  who  were  of  the  soldiery. 
But  our  extended  benevolence  hath  rendered  this  benefit  com- 
mon to  all  our  subjects  in  general,  having  dictated  a  constitution 
both  just  and  noble,  which,  if  heirs  will  strictly  observe,  they 
may  enter  upon  their  inheritance,  and  not  be  made  farther 
chargeable  than  the  value  of  the  estate  will  extend  ;  so  that  they 
are  under  no  necessity  of  praying  a  time  for  deliberation,  unless 
they  omit  to  observe  the  tenor  of  our  ordinance,  chusing  rather 
to  deliberate  and  submit  themselves  to  the  danger  attending  the 
acceptance  of  an  inheritance  according  to  the  antient  law. 

Of  acquiring  or  losing  the  Inheritance. 

VI.  A  stranger,  who  is  instituted  by  testament,  or  called  by 
law  to  take  a  succession  jn  case  of  an  intestacy,  may  make  him- 
self accountable  as  heir,  either  by  doing  some  act  as  such,  or  by 
barely  signifying  his  acceptance  of  the  worship.    And  a  man  is 


B.  ii.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


deemed  to  act  as  the  heir  of  an  inheritance,  if  he  treats  it  as  his 
own,  by  selling  any  part  of  it,  by  cultivating  the  ground,  or  by 
tilling  it  ;  or  even  if  he  declares  his  consent  to  accept  it  in  any 
manner,  either  by  act  or  speech  ;  when  he  knows,  at  the  same 
time,  that  the  person,  with  whose  estate  he  intermeddles,  is  dead 
testate  or  intestate,  and  that  he  himself  is  the  heir:  for  to  act  as 
heir  is  to  act  as  proprietor;  and  the  antients  frequently  used  the 
term  heir,  when  they  would  denote  the  proprietor  of  an  estate. 
But  as  a  stranger  may  become  an  heir  by  a  bare  consent  only,  so 
on  the  contrary,  by  a  mere  dissent,  he  may  bar  himself  from  an 
an  inheritance.  And  nothing  prevents,  but  that  a  person,  who 
was  born  deaf  and  dumb,  or  became  so  by  accident,  may,  Jby 
acting  as  heir,  either  acquire  the  advantages,  or  bring  upon  him- 
self the  disadvantages  of  an  inheritance,  if  he  was  sensible  of 
what  he  was  doing,  and  that  he  was  acting  in  the  capacity  of  an 
heir. 

TITLE  XX. 

OF  LEGACIES. 

Continuation. 

AFTER  what  has  been  said,  we  will  make  some  observations 
upon  the  doctrine  of  legacies  ;  although  a  discussion  of  this  part 
of  the  law  may  not  seem  exactly  to  fall  in  with  the  subject  pro- 
posed ;  for  we  are  treating  only  of  those  legal  methods,  by  which 
things  may  be  acquired  universally  :  but,  as  we  have  already 
spoken  at  large  of  testaments  and  testamentary  heirs,  it  is  not 
without  reason,  that  we  intend  to  treat  of  legacies  in  the  following 
paragraphs. 

Definition, 

I.  A  legacy  is  a  species  of  donation,  which  is  left  or  ordered 
by  the   deceased  ;  and,   if  possible,  must  be  performed  by  his 

heir. 

Of  the  antient  Kinds  of  Legacies. 

II.  Antiently  there  were  four  kinds  of  legacies  in  use;  namely—* 
per  vindicationem—per  damnationem-~sinendi  modo  —  and^>er  prce- 
ceptionem.    And  to  each  of  these  was  assigned  a  certain  form  of 
words,  by  which  their  different  species  were  signified  ;  but  these 
fixed  forms  have  been  wholly  taken  away  by  the  imperial  ordi- 
nance of  the  later  emperors,  Constantinus,  Constantius,  and  Co/z- 
stans.    And  we  also  being  desirous  that  the  wills  of  deceased 
persons  might  be  corroborated,  and  that  their  intentions  should 
be  more  regarded  than  their  words,   have,  with  great  care  and 
study,  composed  a  constitution,  which  enacts,  that  the  nature  of 


100 THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  xx. 

all  legacies  shall  be  the  same  ;  and  that  legataries,  by  whatever 
words  they  are  constituted,  may  sue  for  what  is  left  them,  not 
only  by  a  personal,  but  by  a  real  or  hypothecary  action.  But  the 
reader  may  most  perfectly  comprehend  the  well  weighed  matter 
of  this  constitution  by  perusing  the  tenor  of  it. 

Distinction  of  Legacies  and  Trusts. 

III.  But  we  have  judged  it  expedient,   that  our  constitution 
should  not  rest  here,  but  extend  still  farther  :   for,  when  we  ob- 
served, that  the  antients  confined  legacies  within  very  strict  rules, 
and  yet  were  extremely  favourable  to  gifts  in  trust,  it  was  thought 
necessary  to  make  all  legacies  equal  to  gifts  in  trust,  that  no 
difference  in  effect  should  remain  between  them  ;  so  that  what- 
ever is  deficient  in  the  nature  of  legacies-  may  be  supplied  by  the 
nature  of  trusts,  and  whatever  is  abundant  in  the  nature  of  lega- 
cies may  become  an  accretion  to  the  nature  of  trusts.— But,  that 
we  may  not  raise  difficulties,  and  perplex  the  minds  of  young 
persons  at  their  entrance  upon  the  study  of  the  law,  by  explain- 
ing these  things  promiscuously,  we  have  esteemed  it  worth  our 
pains  to  treat  separately,  first  of  legacies,  and  afterwards  of  trusts, 
that,  the  nature  of  both  being  known,  the  student,  thus  instructed, 
may  more  easily  understand  their  relation  and  intermixture, 

Of  the  Subjects  of  a  Legacy. 

IV.  A  testator  may  not  only  bequeath  his  own  property,  or 
that  of  his  heir,  but  also  the  property  of  others ;  and,  if  the  thing 
bequeathed  belongs  to  another,  the  heir  can  be  obliged  either  to 
purchase  and  deliver  it,  or  to  render  the  value  of  it,  if  it  cannot 
be  purchased.    But,  if  the  thing  bequeathed  is  not  in  commerce, 
and  what  the  law  will  not  permit  to  be  purchased,   the  heir  in 
this  case  can  never  be  obliged  to  pay  the  value  of  it  to  the  lega- 
tary  ;  as  if  a  man  should  bequeath  to  another  the  Campus  Mar- 
tius,  the  palaces  of  the  prince,  the  temples,  or  any  of  those 
things,  which  appertain  to  the  public :  for  such  legacies  can  be  of 
no  moment  or  efficacy.    But,  when  we  said,  that  a  testator  might 
bequeath  the  goods  of  another  man,  we  would  be  understood  to 
mean,  that  this  can  be  done  only,  if  the  deceased  knew,  that  what 
he  bequeathed  belonged  to  another,  and  not,  if  he  was  ignorant  of 
it;  since,  if  he  had  known  it,  he  probably  would  not  have  left  such 
a  legacy;  and  to  this  purpose  is  the  rescript  of  the  emperor  An- 
tonius.    And  it  is  incumbent  upon  the  party,  agent,  or  legatory  to 
bring  proof  that  the  deceased  knew,  that  what  he  left  belonged 
to  another ;  for  the  heir  is  by  no  means  obliged  to  prove,  that  the 
deceased  did  not  know  it;  because,  by  the  general  rule  of  law, 
the  necessity  of  proving  lies  upon  the  complainant. 


B.  IT.  T.  xx. OF  JUSTINIAN. 101 

Of  a  pledged  Thing. 

V.  If  a  man  bequeaths  a  thing,  which  he  hath  pledged  to  a 
creditor,  the  heir  is  under  a  necessity  of  redeeming  it :  but  in  this 
case,  as  in  the  former,  concerning  the  goods  of  another,  the  heir 
cannot  be  obliged   to  redeem  the  thing  bequeathed,  unless  the 
deceased  knew,  that  it  was   pledged  ;  and  this  the  emperors 
Severus  and  Antoninus  have  declared  by  their  rescript.     But  never- 
theless, whenever  it  appears  to  have  been  the  express  will  of  the 
deceased,  that  the  legatary  should  himself  redeem  the  thing  left 
to  him,  tben  the  heir  is  free  from  the  obligation  of  doing  it. 

Of  the  Property  of  another  acquired  after  the   Will  by  a  Legatee. 

VI.  If  a  thing  bequeathed  is  the  property  of  another,  and  the 
legatee  becomes  the  proprietor  of  it  in  the  life-time  of  the  testator, 
it  is  necessary  to  be  known  by  what  means  the  legatee  became 
the  proprietor;  for,  if  he  bought  it,  he  may  nevertheless  recover 
the  price  given,  by  an  action  in  consequence  of  the  testament ; 
but,  if  he  obtained  it  as  a  gift,  or  by  any  such  lucrative  title,  no 
action  will  lie  ;  for,  it  is  a  maxim,  that  two  lucrative  causes  can 
never  concur  in  the  same  person  and  thing.    And  therefore,  if 
the  same  specific  thing  is  left  by  two  testaments  to  one  and  the 
same  person,  the  question  will  be,  when  the  legatary  sues  in  virtue 
of  one  of  the  testaments,   whether   he  hath  obtained   the  thing 
itself,  or  the  value  of  it,  by  virtue  of  the  other  ?  for,  if  he  is 
already  possessed  of  the  thing  itself,  the  suit  is  at  an  end,  because 
he  hath  received  it  on  a  lucrative  account ;  but,  if  he  hath  ob- 
tained the  value  of  it  only  from  the  heir  of  one  of  the  testators, 
he  may  bring  an  action  for  the  thing  itself,  against  the  heir  of 
the  other. 

Of  Things  which  do  not  exist. 

VII.  Things,  which  do  not  exist,  may  be  rightly  bequeathed, 
if  there  is  but  a  possibility,  that  they  may  exist :  thus  a  man  may 
devise  the  fruits,  which  shall  grow  on  such  a  spot  of  ground  ;  or 
the  offspring,  which  shall  be  born  of  a  particular  slave. 

Of  a  Legacy  of  the  same  thing  to  two. 

,  VIII.  When  the  same  specific  legacy  is  left  to  two  persons 
either  conjunctively  or  disjunctively,  if  they  are  both  willing  to 
accept  it,  it  must  be  divided  between  them.  But,  if  one  of  the 
legatees  dies  in  the  life-time  of  the  testator,  dislikes  his  legacy,  or 
is  by  any  means  prevented  from  taking  it,  the  whole  vests  in  his 
co-legatee.  A  legacy  thus  worded  is  in  the  conjunctive,  J  give 
and  bequeath  my  slave  STICHUS  to  TITIUS  and  SEIUS  :— but  a 
legacy,  worded  as  follows,  is  in  the  disjunctive — /  give  and  be- 
queath my  slave  STICHUS  to  TITIUS;  I  give  and  bequeath  my 


10*  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  xx« 

slave  STICHUS  to  SEIUS,  And,  although  the  testator  should 
add,  that  he  gives  the  same  slave  STICHUS  to  SEIUS,  yet  the 
legacy  would  nevertheless  be  understood  to  be  left  in  the 
disjunctive. 

IX.  If  a  man  hath  bequeathed  the  ground  of  another,  and  the 
legatary  hath  purchased  the  property  of  that  ground  without  the 
usufruct,  which   hath  also  afterwards  accrued   to  him,  it  is  said 
by  Julianus,  that  the  legatary  may  rightly  briag  an  action  by 
virtue  of  the  testament,  and  demand  the  gremnd,  because   the 
usufruct  is  regarded  as  a  service  only.     But  it  is  the  duty  of  a 
judge,  in  this  case,  to  order  the  price  of  the  property  of  the  ground 
to  be  paid,  the  value  of  the  usufruct  being  deducted. 

Of  the  Property  of  the  Legatee. 

X.  If  a  man  bequeaths  to  another  what  already  belongs  tohirn^ 
the  legacy  is  ineffectual;  for  that,  which  is  already  the  property 
of  a  legatee,  can  by  no  means  become  more  so.     And,  although 
the  legatee  should,  after  the  bequest,  alien  the  thing  bequeathed, 
neither  the  thing  itself,  nor  even  the  value  of  it,   would  become, 
due  to  him  from  the  heir  of  the  testator. 

Of  the  Legacy  of  what  is  not  your  own. 

XI.  If  a  testator  should  bequeath  what  is  his  own,  as  if  it  was 
the  property  of  another,  the  bequest  would  nevertheless  be  good  ; 
for  truth  is  more  prevalent  than  what  is  founded  upon  opinion 
only.     But  even  suppose  the  testator  to  imagine,  that  what  he 
bequeaths  belongs  already  to  the  legatary,  yet,  if  it  does  not,  it  is 
certain, that  such  a  legacy  would  also  be  valid;  because  the  will 
of  the  deceased  can  thus  take  effect. 

Of  the  Alienation  or  Mortgage  of  a  Legacy. 

XII.  But,  if  a  testator  bequeaths  what  is  his  own  property,  and 
afterwards  aliens  it,  it  is  the  opinion  of  CELSUS,  that  the  thing 
bequeathed  will  nevertheless  become  due  to  the  legatee,  if  the 
testator  did  not  dispose  of  it,  with  an  intention  to  oust  him.    The 
emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  have  published  their  rescript  to 
this  effect;  and  they  have  also  signified  by  another  rescript*  that 
whoever  has  bequeathed  a  legacy,  and  hath  afterwards  pawned  or 
mortgaged  it,  shall  not  be  deemed  to  have  retracted  it ;  and  that 
the  legatee  may  therefore  of  course  bring  an  action,  against  the 
heir,  and  oblige  him  to  redeem.    And,  if  a   testator  shall  have 
aliened  but  a  part  of  the  thing  bequeathed,  then  all  that  part, 
which  remains  unaliened,  is  still  due  ;  and  that,  which  is  aliened, 
is  only  due,  if  it  appears  not  to  have  been  aliened  by  the  testator 
with  a  design  to  retract  the  legacy. 


*.  n.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  103 

Of  the  Legacy  of  a  Discharge  from  Debt. 

XIII.  If  a  man  bequeaths  a  discharge  to  his  debtor,  the  bequest 
is  effectual;  and  the  heir  can  bring  no  suit  against  the  debtor,  or 
his  heir,  or  any  one,  who  represents  him  :   but,  on  the  contrary, 
the  heir  of  the  testator   may  be  convened  by  the  debtor,  and 
obliged  to  give  him  his  discharge.     A  man  may  also  by  testament 
command  his  heir  not  to  sue  a  debtor,  within  a  time  limited. 

Of  a  Legacy  bequeathed  to  a  Creditor. 

XIV.  On  the  contrary,  if  a  debtor  bequeaths  by  testament  to 
his  creditor  the  money,  which  he  owes  him,  this  legacy  is  inef- 
fectual, if  the  value  of  the  legacy  amounts  but  merely  to  the  value 
9f  the  debt ;  for  thus  the  creditor  can  receive  no  benefit  from  the 
legacy.     But,  if  a  debtor  bequeaths  simply  to  his  creditor  a  sum 
of  money,  which  was  to  be  paid  at  a  day  certain,  or  which  he  owed 
upon  condition,  the  legacy  will  take  effect  on  account  of  the  re- 
presentation, t.  e.  on  account  of  the  immediate  payment,  the  legacy 

becoming  due  before  the  debt. But,  according  to  PAPINIAN, 

if  the  day  of  payment  should  come,  or  the  event  of  the  condition 
happen  in  the  life-time  of  the  testator,  the  legacy  would  never- 
theless be  effectual,  because  it  was  once  good ;  which   is   true. 
For  we  are  by  no  means  satisfied  with  the  opinion  of  those,  who 
imagine,  that  a  legacy  once  good,  may  afterwards  become  extinct, 
by  falling  into  a  state,  from  which  it  could  not  have  taken  a  legal 
commencement. 

Of  the  Legacy  of  a  Dower. 

XIV.  If  a  man  gives  back  to  his  wife  by  legacy  her  marriage 
portion,  the  legacy  is  valid  :  for  such  a  legacy  is  more  beneficial 
to  her  than  the  action,  which  she  might  maintain  for  the  recovery 
of  her  portion.  But,  if  an  husband  bequeaths  to  his  wife  her 
marriage  portion,  and  hath  never  actually  received  it,  the  empe- 
rors Severus  and  Antoninus  have  declared  by  their  rescript,  that, 
if  it  is  left  simply  without  any  specification  of  a  sum  certain,  the 
legacy  is  void  ;  but  that,  if  any  certain  sum,  or  thing  is  specified, 
or  if  the  instruments,  in  which  the  exact  value  of  the  portion  is 
mentioned,  are  referred  to,  the  legacy  is  valid. 

Of  the  destruction  or  change  of  the  subject  of  a  Legacy. 

XVI.  If  a  thing  bequeathed  should  perish  before  delivery, 
otherwise  than  by  the  act.  or  fault  of  the  heir,  the  loss  must  fall 
upon  the  legatary.  And,  if  the  slave  of  another,  who  is  bequeathed, 
shall  be  manumitted,  and  the  heir  hath  not  been  privy  to  the 
manumission,  he  can  be  subject  to  no  action.  But,  if  a  testator 
bequeaths  the  slave  of  his  heir,  who  afterwards  manumits  that 
slave,  it  is  the  opinion  of  JULIAN,  that  the  heir  is  answerable : 
nor  is  it  at  all  material,  whether  hex  did  or  did  not  know  of  the 


104  THE  INSTITUTES.  B.  n.  T.  xx. 

legacy.    And  also,  if  the  heir  hath  made  a  present  of  a  slave  be- 
queathed,  and  the  donee  hath  manumitted  him,  the  heir  is  liable 
to  an  action,  although  he  was  ignorant  of  the  bequest. 
Of  the  Death  of  the  Subjects  of  a  Legacy. 

XVII.  If  a  testator  gives  by  legacy  his  female  slaves  and  their* 
offspring,  although  the  slaves  die,  yet  their  issue  will  become  due 
to  the  legatary:   and  the  same  obtains,  if  ordinary  slaves  are 
bequeathed  together  with  vicarial:  for  although  the  ordinary  slave* 
die,  yet  the  vicarial  slaves  will  pass  by  virtue  of  the  bequest. 
But,  if  a  slave  is  bequeathed  with  his  peculium,  and  afterwards 
dies,  or  is  manumitted,  or  aliened,  the  legacy  of  the  peculium 
becomes  extinct.    And  the  consequences  will  be  the  same,  if  a 
piece  of  ground  is  bequeathed  with  the  instruments  for  improving 
it;  for,  if  the  testator  aliens  the  ground,  the  legacy  of  the  instru- 
ments of  husbandry  is  of  course  extinguished. 

Of  the  Legacy  of  a  Flock. 

XVIII.  If  a  flock  is  bequeathed,  and  afterwards  reduced  to  a 
single  sheep,  that  sheep  is  claimable ;  and,  if  a  flock  receives  an 
increase  or  addition,  after  it  hath  been  disposed  of  by  testament, 
the  increase  or  addition  will  also,  according  to  Julian,  become  due 
to  the  legatary.    For  a  flock  is  deemed  one  body,  consisting  of 
separate  members,  as  an  house  is  reckoned  one  body,  composed 
of  materials,  joined  together  and  adhering. 

Of  the  Legacy  of  Houses. 

XIX.  And  lastly,  when  an  house  is  bequeathed,  the  marble  or 
pillars,  which  are  added  after  the  bequest  is  made,  will  pass 
under  the  general  legacy. 

Of  the  Peculium. 

XX.  When  the  peculium  of  a  slave  is  bequeathed,  it  is  certain, 
that  the  increase  or  decrease  of  it,  in  the  life  of  the  testator, 
becomes  the  loss  or  gain  of  the  legatary.    And,  if  the  peculium  of 
a  slave  is  left  to  him  together  with  his  liberty,  and  such  slave 
makes  an  acquisition  to  the  peculium,  subsequent  to  the  death  of 
the  testator,  and  before  the  inheritance  is  entered  upon,  it  is  the 
opinion  of  Julian,  that  whatever  is  acquired  within  that  period,  will 
pass  to  him  as  the  legatary ;  for  such  a  legacy  does  not  become  due, 
but  from  the  day  of  the  acceptance  of  the  inheritance.    But  it  is 
the  opinion  of  the  same  Julian,  that,  if  the  peculium  of  a  slave  is 
bequeathed  to  a  stranger,  an  increase,  acquired  within  the  period 
above-mentioned,  will  not  pass   under  the  legacy,   unless  the 
acquisition  was  made,  by  means  of  something  appertaining  to  the 
peculium ;  for  the  peculium  of  a  slave  does  not  belong  to  him, 


fe.n.  T.  xx>  OF  JUSTINIAN*  105 


after  he  is  manumitted  by  testament,  unless  it  is  expressly  given ; 
although,  if  a  master  in  his  life-time  manumits  his  slave,  his 
peculium  will  pass  to  him  of  course,  if  not  excepted;  and  thus 
the  emperors  Severus  and  Antoninus  have  decreed  by  their  rescript. 
And  the  same  emperors  have  also  declared,  that,  when  a  peculium 
is  bequeathed  to  a  slave,  it  does  not  seem  to  be  the  intention  of 
the  testator,  that  such  slave  should  have  the  power  of  demanding 
what  he  may  have  expended  for  the  use  of  his  master.  And  the 
same  princes  have  farther  declared,  that  a  slave  seems  to  be  intitled 
to  his  peculium,  if  his  liberty  is  left  him,  on  condition,  that  he 
will  bring  in  his  accounts,  and  supply  any  deficiency  out  of  the 
profits  of  his  peculium. 

Of  corporeal  and  incorporeal  Things. 

XXI.  Things  incorporeal  may  be  bequeathed  as  well  as  things 
corporeal :  and  therefore  a  debt,  due  to  the  testator,  may  be  left 
as  a  legacy,  and  the  heir  be  obliged  to  transfer  his  right  of  action 
to  the  legatary ;  unless  the  testator  in  his  life-time  received  the 
money  due  to  him;  for  in  this  case  the  legacy  would  become 
extinct.    A  legacy  is  also  good,  if  conceived  in  the  terms  fol- 
lowing : "  I  command   my   heir  to    rebuild   the    house  of 

TIT i us :"  or,  "  to  free  him  from  his  debts." 

Of  a  particular  Legacy. 

XXII.  If  a  testator  bequeaths  a  slave,  or  any  particular  thing 
generally,  the  power  of  election  is  in  the  legatary,  unless  the  tes- 
tator hath  declared  otherwise. 

Of  the  Legacy  of  an  Option. 

XXIII.  The  legacy  of  an  option  is  made,  when  a  testator  com- 
mands his  legatary  to  chuse  any  slave  whom  he  likes,  from  among 
his  slaves,  or  any  one  thing,  which  he  best  approves  of,  from  any 
certain  class  of  things  ;  and  such  a  legacy  was  formerly  presumed 
to  imply  this  condition,  that,  if  the  legatee  in  his  life-time  did  not 
jnake  his  election,  the  legacy  could  not  be  transmitted  to  his 
heir.    But,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution,  this  presumed  condition 
is  now  taken  away,  and  the  heir  of  the  legatary  is  permitted  to 
make  his  option,  although  the  legatary  in   his   life-time  hath 
neglected  to  do  it.    And,  upon  a  more  diligent  inspection,  we 
have  farther  added  to  our  constitution,  that,  if  there  are  several 
legataries,  to  whom  an  option  is  left,  and  they  differ  in  their 
choice,  or  if  there  are  many  heirs  of  one  legatary,  who  are  -of 
divers  sentiments,  then  Fortune  must  be  the  judge:  for,  lest  the 
loss  of  the  legacy  should  insue  (which  loss  the  generality  of  the 
antient  lawyers,  contrary  to  all  benevolence,  would  have  per* 

VOL.  1.  No.  5.  O 


106 THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xx, 

mitted),  we  have  decreed,  that  such  dissentions  between  heirs, 
or  legataries,  should  be  decided  by  lot ;  so  that  the  option  of  him, 
to  whom  the  lot  falls,  shall  be  preferred. 

To  whom  Legacies  may  be  left. 

XXIV.  A  legacy  cannot  be  left  but  to  those,  who  have  the  ca- 
pacity of  taking  by  testament. 

Antient  Law  respecting  uncertain  Persons. 

XXV.  It  was  not  formerly  permitted,  that  either  legacies,  or 
gifts  in  trust,  should  be  bequeathed  to  uncertain  persons;  for  even 
a  soldier  was  prohibited  to  bequeath  to  uncertain  persons ;  as  the 
emperor  Adrian  hath  declared  by  his  rescript:  and  an  uncertain 
person  is  reputed  to  be  one,  whom  the  testator  hath  figured  only 
in  his  imagination,  without  any  determinate  knowledge  of  him  : 

as  if  a  testator  should  thus  express  himself: "  Whoever  shall 

give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  my  son,  to  that  person  let  my 
heir  deliver  up  such  a  piece  of  ground.1'     And,  if  a  testator  had 
made  a  bequest  to  the  first  consuls  designed  after  his  testament 
teas  written,  this  also  would  have  been  esteemed  a  bequest  to  un- 
certain persons:  and  of  the  same  kind  there  are  diverse  other 

.examples.  Freedom  likewise  could  not  be  conferred  upon  an 
uncertain  person  ;  fop  it  was  necessary,  that  all  slaves  should  be 
nominally  infranchised  :  but  a  legacy  might  have  been  given  to 
an  uncertain  person  under  a  certain  demonstration  ;  or,  in  other 
•words,  to  an  uncertain  person,  if  he  was  one  of  a  number  of  per- 
sons certain;  as  for  instance,  if  a  testator  should  bequeath  in  the 
manner  following;— — "  I  command  TITIUS  my  heir  to  give 
such  a  particular  thing  to  any  one  of  my  present  collateral  relations* 
who  shall  think  proper  to  take  my  daughter  in  marriage."  But^ 
if  a  legacy  or  fiduciary  gift  had  been  paid  to  uncertain  persons 
by  mistake,  it  was  provided  by  the  constitutions,  that  such  per- 
sons were  not  compellable  to  refund. 

Antient  Law  respecting  a  posthumous  Stranger. 

XXVI.  Formerly  a  legacy  could  not  have  been  profitably  or 
legally  given  to  a  posthumous  stranger;   and   a   posthumous 
stranger  is  he,  who,  if  he  had  been  born  before  the  death  of  the 
testator,  could  not  have  been  numbered  among  his  proper  heirs : 
and  of  consequence  a  posthumous  grandson,  by  an  emancipated 
son,  was  a  posthumous  stranger  in  regard  to  his  grandfather, 

New  Law, 

XXVII.  Such  was  the  state  of  the  ancient  law,  which  hath  not 
been  left  without  a  proper  emendation  ;  for  we  have  promulged 
a  constitution,  by  which  we  have  altered  the  law  concerning 


B.  ii.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  107 

certain  persons,  not  only  in  respect  to  inheritances,  but  in  regard 
also  to  legacies  and  fiduciary  bequests.  But  this  alteration  will 
evidently  appear  from  a  perusal  of  the  constitution  itself;  which 
nevertheless  gives  no  authority  to  the  denomination  of  an  uncer- 
tain tutor;  for  it  is  incumbent  upon  every  parent  to  take  care 
of  his  posterity  in  this  respect,  by  a  certain  and  determinate 
appointment. 

Concerning  a  posthumous  Stranger  appointed  Heir. 

XXVIII.  A  posthumous  stranger  could  formerly  have  been  in- 
stituted, and  may  now  be  appointed,  an  heir,  unless  it  appears, 
that  he  was  conceived  by  a  woman,  who  could  not  have  been 
legally  married  to  his  father. 

Of  Error  in  the  Name  of  the  Legatee. 

XXIX.  Although  a  testator  may  happen  to  have  mistaken  the 
nomen,  cognomen, prcenomen,  or  agnomen  of  a  legatary,  yet,  if  his 
person  is  certain,  the  legacy  is  good.     The  same  rule  of  law  is 
also  observed  in  regard  to  Heirs,  and  with  great  reason ;  for  the 
use  of  names  is  but  to  point  out  persons  ;  and,   if  persons  can  be 
denoted  by  any  other  method,  it  will  make  no  difference. 

Of  false  Demonstration^ 

XXX.  The  rule  of  law,  which  comes  nearest  to  the  foregoing, 
is,  that  a  legacy  is  not  rendered  null  by  a  false  demonstration  : 

suppose,  for  instance,  that  a  bequest  is  thus  worded  : "  I  give 

and  bequeath  STICHUS  my  slave,  who  was  born  in  my  family  :" 

in  this  case,  although  Stichus  was   not  born  in  the  family 

of  the  testator,  but  bought,  yet,  if  there  is  a  certainty  of  his  per- 
son, the  legacy  is  valid.   And  if  a  testator  should  write  as  follows  : 

"  I  bequeath  STICHUS  my  slave,  whom  I  bought  of  SEIUS" 

yet,  although  he  was  bought  of  another,  the  legacy  would  be 

good,  if  there  was  no  doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  the  person  of 
STICHUS, 

Of  a  false  Reason  assigned. 

XXXI.  A  fortiori    a  legacy  is  not  rendered  the  less  valid, 
although  a  false  reason  is  assigned  for  bequeathing  it:  as  if  a  tes- 
tator should  thus  express  himself: "  I  give  my  slave  STICHUS 

to  TITIUS,  because  he  took  care  of  my  affairs  in  my  absence;" 
or,  "  because  I  was  acquitted  upon  an  accusation  of  a  capital  of- 
fence by  his  care  and  protection."  For  although  Titius  had  never 
taken  care  of  the  affairs  of  the  deceased,  and  although  the  testator 
•was  never  acquitted  from  any  charge  of  a  capital  crime  by  means 
pf  Titius,  the  legacy  will  nevertheless  be  good.     But  if  the  bequest 
Jiad  been  declared  to  be  conditional,  as  for  example,  if  the  testator 


108 THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xx. 

had  expressed  himself  as  follows  " 1  give  to  Titius,  such  a 

piece  of  ground,  if  it  shall  appear,  that  he  hath  taken  a  proper 
care  of  my  affairs,"  then  the  law  would  be  different. 
Of  the  Slave  of  the  Heir. 

XXXII.  It  hath  been  a  question,  whether  a  testator  can  legally 
give  a  legacy  to  the  slave  of  his  heir;   and  it  is  certain,  that  a 
legacy,  purely  and  simply  given  to  such  a  slave,  can  avail  him 
nothing,  although  he  should  afterwards  be  freed  from  the  power 
of  the  heir  in  the  life-time  of  the  testator;  for  a  bequest,  which 
would  have  been  null,  if  the  testator  had  expired  immediately 
after  he  had  made  it,  ought  not  to  become  valid,  merely  because 
the  testator  happened  to  enjoy  a  longer  life.     But  a  testator  may 
give  a  conditional  legacy  to  the  slave  of  his  instituted  heir,  and 
such  legacy  will  be  good,  if  the  slave  is  not  under  the  power  of 
the  heir,  when  the  condition  is  fulfilled. 

Of  the  Master  of  the  Heir. 

XXXIII.  On  the  contrary  it  is  not  doubted,  but  that  a  slave 
may  be  appointed  an  heir,  and  that  his  then  master  may  take 
even  a  simple  legacy  by  the  same  testament :  for,  although  the 
testator  should  die  instantly  after  making  his  testament,  yet  the 
legacy  is  not  understood  to  become  immediately  due  from  the 
slave,  who  is  the  heir:  for  the  inheritance  is  here  separate  from, 
the  legacy,  and  another  may  become  heir  by  means  of  the  slave, 
if  he  should  be  transferred  to  a  new  master,  before  he  hath  entered 
upon  the  inheritance,  at  the  command  of  his  master,  who  is  the 
legatary ;  or  the  slave  himself  may  become  heir  in  his  own  right 
by  manumission ;  and,  in  these  cases,  the  legacy  would  be  good. 
But,  if  the  slave  should  remain  in  the  same  state,  and  enter  upon 
the  inheritance  by  order  of  his  master,  who  is  the  legatary,  the, 
legacy  would,  as  such,  become  extinct. 

Of  the  manner  of  giving  Legacies.     Of  the  order  of  th/e  words. 

XXXIV.  A  legacy  could  not  formerly  have  been  given  with, 
effect,  till  the  heir  was  instituted ;  because  a  testament  receives, 
its  whole  force  and  efficacy  from  the  institution  of  the  heir, 
which  is  understood  to  be  the  basis  and  foundation  of  it ;  and  by 
a  parity  of  reasoning  it  was  also  necessary,  that  the  institution  of 
an  heir  should  always  precede  the  grant  of  freedom  in  a  testament. 
But  we  have  thought  it  to  be  wrong  and  absurd,  that  a  strict 
regard  should  be  paid  to  the  mere  order  of  writing,  in  direct 
opposition  to  the  express  intention  of  a  testator ;  and  the  antient^ 
themselves  seem  to  have  been  of  this  opinion  in  general :  we  have 
therefore,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution,  amended  the  law  in  this 
point;  so  that  a  legacy  may  now  be  given ;  and,  a  fortiori,  a 


l».  ii.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN*.  109 

of  liberty,  which  is  always  favored,  may  be  bequeathed,  before  the 
institution  of  an  heir,  where  there  is  but  one;  and,  either  before 
or  between  the  institutions  of  heirs,  where  there  are  several. 
Of  a  Legacy  after  the  death  of  the  Heir. 

XXXV.  A  bequest,  made  to  take  place  after  the  death  of  an 
heir  or  legatary,  was  also  ineffectual :  for,  if  a  testator  had  written, 
"when  my  heir  is  dead,  I  give  and  bequeath  an  hundred  AUREI 
to  Titius,-~or  even  thus,  I  give  and  bequeath  an  hundred  AUREI 
to  be  paid  to  Titius,  on  the  day  preceding  the  day  of  the  death 
of  my  heir, — ^-or,  on  the  day  preceding  the  day  of  the  death 

of  my  legatary, -"  the  legacies  in  any  of  these  cases  would  have 

been  void.    But  we  have  corrected  the  antient  rule  of  law  in  this 
respect,  by  giving  all  such  legacies  the  same  validity,  which  is 
given  to  gifts  in  trust ;   lest  trusts  should  be  found  to  be  more 
favored,  than  legacies. 

Conditional  Penal  Inheritances. 

XXXVI.  Also  formerly,  if  a  testator  had  given,  revoked,  or  trans* 
ferred  a  legacy  pcence  nomine,  he  would  have  acted  ineffectually, 
and  a  legacy  is  reputed  to  be  bequeathed  pcence  nomine,  [i.  e.  as  a 
punishment  or  penalty,]  when  an  heir  is  put  under  the  necessity  of 
doing  or  not  doing  something :  as  for  instance,  if  a  testator  had  thus 
written;  t(  if  my  heir  gives  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  TITIUS  ;  or, 
if  he  does  not  give  her  in  marriage  to  Titius,  let  him  pay  ten  Aurei 
to  Seius;  or  thus — —if  my  heir  shall  alien  my  slave  Stichus;  or, 
on  the  contrary,  if  my  heir  shall  not  alien  my  slave  Stichus,  let 
him  pay  ten  Aurei  to  Titius."  And  this  rule  was  so  far  observed, 
that  it  was  expressly  ordained  by  many  constitutions,  that  even 
the  emperor  could  not  receive  a  legacy,  which  was  bequeathed 
pcsnce  nomine;   nor  could  a  penal  legacy  be  valid,  even  when  it 
had  been  bequeathed  by  the  testament  of  a  soldier;   although,  in 
every  other  respect,  the  intention  of  a  testator  in  a  military 
testament  was  always  scrupulously  adhered  to.   And  even  freedom 
could  not  be  bequeathed,  nor,  in  the  opinion  of  Sabinus,  could  an 
heir  be  added  in  a  testament,  sub  pcenos  nomine:  for,  if  a  testator 
had  said,  "let  Titius  be  my  heir,  but  if  he  gives  his  daughter  in 
marriage  to  Seius,  let  Seius  also  be  my  heir,"  the  appointment  of 
Seius  would  have  been  void;   for  the  manner,  in  which  an  heir 
was  laid  under  coercion,  whether  it  was  by  the  gift  of  a  legacy,  or 
by  the  addition  of  another  heir,  worked  no  alteration  in  the  general 
rule  of  law.   But  this  scrupulosity  hath  been  by  no  means  agreeable 
to  us,  and  we  have  therefore  ordained,  that  in  general  the  doctrine 
of  the  law  in  regard  to  any  thing  left,  revoked,  or  transferred,  in 
punishment  of  an  heir,  should  not  differ  from  the  rules  of  law 


110  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  II.T. 

observed  in  relation  to  other  legacies,  when  the  performance  of 
the  condition  of  obtaining  them  is  neither  impossible,  prohibited 
by  law,  nor  contrary  to  good  manners:  for  the  morality,  religion, 
and  justice  of  the  present  times,  will  not  suffer  such  testamentary 
dispositions  to  take  place. 

TITLE  XXI. 
OF  THE  REVOCATION  OR  TRANSFER  OF  LEGACIES. 

Of  the  Revocation  of  Legacies. 

A  revocation  of  a  legacy  is  valid,  although  it  is  inserted  in  thr. 
same  testament  or  codicil,  in  which  the  legacy  was  given.  And 
it  is  immaterial,  whether  the  revocation  is  made  in  words  contrary 
to  the  bequest ;  as  when  a  testator  gives  a  legacy  in  these  terms, 

"I  give  and  bequeath  to  Titius," and  revokes  it  by  adding-, 

" 1  do  not  give  and  bequeath  to  Titius :"  or  whether  the  re- 
vocation is  made  by  any  other  form  of  words. 

Of  the  Transfer. 
I.  A  legacy  may  also  be  transferred  from  one  person  to  another; 

as  thus  " 1  give  to  Seius  my  slave  Stichus,  whom  I  have 

bequeathed  to  Titius."  This  may  be  done  in  the  same  testament 
or  codicil,  in  which  the  legacy  was  first  given  ;  and  thus  a  legacy 
may  be  taken  tacitly  and  by  implication  from  Titius  and  transferred 
to  Seius. 

TITLE  XXII. 
OF  THE  FALCIDIAN  LAW. 

Reason  and  Sum  of  this  Law. 
IT  remains  to  speak  of  the  law  Faltidia,  by  which  legacies  have 

received  their  latest  regulation.    By  the  law  of  the  12  tables, - 

uti  (juisfjue  legassitsucc  rei,  itajus  estot a  testator  was  permitted 

to  dispose  of  his  whole  patrimony  in  legacies;  but  it  was  thought 
proper  to  restrain  this  licence  even  for  the  benefit  of  testators 
themselves,  because  they  frequently  died  intestate,  their  heirs 
refusing  to  enter  upon  an  inheritance,  from  which  they  could 
receive  no  profit,  or  but  very  little.  And  this  occasioned  the 
introduction  first  of  the  law  Furia,  and  afterwards  of  the  law 
Voconia :  but,  when  neither  of  these  was  found  adequate  to  the 
purpose  intended,  the  Falcidian  law  was  at  length  enacted;  which 
prohibits  a  testator  to  give  more  in  legacies,  than  three  fourths  of 
all  his  effects;  so  that,  whether  there  is  one  or  more  heirs,  there 
inust  now  remain  to  him,  or  them,  an  iutire  fourth  part  of  the 
whole. 


B.  ii.  T.  xxii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  Hi 

Of  the  Plurality  of  Heirs. 

I.  When  two  heirs  are  instituted,  for  example,  Titius  and  Seius, 
and  Titius' s  moity  of  the  inheritance  is  wholly  exhausted,  or 
overcharged  by  legacies,  which  he  his  expressly  ordered  lo  pay; 
and  on  the  other  side  Seius  s  moity  is  either  not  incumbered,  or  is 
charged  with  legacies,  which  amount  only  to  a  part  of  his  share; 
it  hath  in  this  case  been  a  question,  whether,  although  Seius  hath 
a  fourth  or  more  of  the  whole  inheritance,  it  may  not  nevertheless 

-be  lawful  for  Titius  to  make  a  stoppage  out  of  the  legacies,  with 
which  he  is  charged,  so  as  to  retain  a  fourth  part  out  of  his  own 
moity?  and  it  hath  been  determined,  that  Titius  may  make  such 
stoppage :  for  the  reason  and  equity  of  the  law  Falcidia  extends  to 
each  heir  in  particular. 

Quantity  of  the  Inheritance. 

II.  But  the  law  Falcidia  hath  regard  only  to  the  quantity  of  the 
estate  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  testator;   and  therefore,  if 
he,  who  is  worth  but  an  hundred  aurei  at  his  decease,  bequeaths 
them  all  in  legacies,  the  legatees  must  suffer  a  defalcation;   for 
they  will  receive  no  manner  of  advantage,  although  the  inheritance, 
after  the  death  of  the  testator  and  before  it  is  entered  upon,  should 
so  increase  by  the  acquisitions  of  slaves,  the  children  of  female 
slaves,  or  the  product  of  cattle,  that  after  a  full  payment  of  the 
100  aurei  in  legacies,  an  intire  fourth  of  the  whole  estate  might 
remain  to  the  heir ;  for,  notwithstanding-  the  increase  of  the  testa- 
tor's estate,  subsequent  to  his  death,  a  fourth  part  of  the  hundred 
aurei  would  still  be  due  to  the  heir,  and    the  legacies   would 
remain  subject  to  a  defalcation  upon  that  account.     But,  on  the 
contrary,  if  a  testator  hath  bequeathed  75  aurei  in  legacies,  and  was 
worth  an  hundred  aurei  at  his  death,   then  although  it  should 
happen,  that,  before  the  entrance  of  the  heir,  the  estate  should 
so  decrease  by  fire,  shipwreck,  or  the  loss  of  slaves,  that  the  whole, 
value  of  it  should  not  be  more  than  75  aurei,  and  perhaps  less,  yet 
the  legacies  would  still  be  due  without  defalcation;    nor  is  this 
law  prejudicial  to  an  heir,  who  is  always  at  his  election  either  to 
refuse  or  accept  an  inheritance;  but  it  obliges  legataries  to  come 
to  an  agreement  with  the  heir  to  take  a  part,  lest  they  should  lose 
the  whole  of  their  legacies  by  his  desertion  of  the  testament. 

Deductions  before  the  effect  of  the  Falcidian  law. 

III.  The  Falcidian  portion   is  not  taken  by  the  heir,  till  the 
debts,  funeral  expences,  and  the  price  of  the  manumission  of 
slaves,  have  all  been  previously  deducted  ;  and  then  the  fourth 
part  of  the  remainder  appertains  to  the  heir,  and  the  other  three 
parts  are  divided  among  the  legataries  in  a  ratable  proportion:  for 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T. 


example,  let  it  be  supposed,  that  400  aurei  have  been  bequeathed 
in  legacies,  and  that  the  estate,  from  which  these  legacies  are 
intended  to  issue,  is  worth  but  exactly  that  sum;  it  follows,  that 
a  fourth  must  be  substracted  from  the  legacy  of  each  legatary  ; 
but,  if  the  testator  gave  in  legacies  no  more  than  350  aurei>  and 
there  remained  after  debts  paid  400,  then  an  eighth  only  ought  to 
be  deducted  from  each  legacy.  And,  if  a  testator  hath  bequeathed 
000  aurei  in  legacies,  and  there  remain  clear  in  the  hands  of  the 
heir  but  400,  then  a  fifth  must  first  be  deducted  from  every  legacy, 
and  afterwards  a  fourth:  but  that,  which  exceeds  the  real  value  of 
the  goods  of  the  deceased,  must  first  be  substracted,  and  then 
follows  the  deduction  of  what  is  due  to  the  heir. 

TITLE  XXIIL 
OF  FIDUCIARY  INHERITANCES. 

Continuation. 

LET  us  now  proceed  to  trusts  ;  in  treating  of  which,  we  will 
first  speak  of  fiduciary  inheritances. 

Origin  of  Fiduciary  Trusts. 

I.  It  must  be  observed,  that  in  the  first  times  all  trusts  were 
weak  and  precarious;  for  no  man  could  be  compelled  to  the  per- 
formance of  what  he  was  only  requested  to  perform.    And  yet, 
when  testators  were  desirous  of  giving  an  inheritance  or  legacy  to 
persons,  to  whom  they  could  directly  bequeath  neither,  they  then 
committed  the  inheritance  or  legacy  in  trust  to  those,  who  were 
capable  of  taking  ;  and  such  commitments  were  called  fiduciary, 
because  the  performance  of  the  trust  could  not  be  inforced  by  the 
law,  but  depended  solely  upon  the  honour  of  the  trustee.    But 
the  emperor  Augustus,  having  been  frequently  moved  with  com- 
passion on  account  of  particular  persons,  and  detesting  the  perjury 
and  perfidiousness  of  trustees  in  general,  commanded  the  consuls  to 
interpose  their  authority;  and  this,  being  a  just  and  popular  com- 
mand, gave  them  by  degrees  a  continued  jurisdiction;  and  in  pro- 
cess of  time  trusts  became  so  common,  and  were  so  highly  favoured, 
that  a  praetor  was  purposely  appointed  to  give  judgment  in  these 
cases,  and  was  therefore  called  the  commissary  of  trusts. 

Of  the  Fiduciary  Trusts  of  the  Heir. 

II.  We  must  here  observe,  that  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  of 
appointing  an  heir  in  direct  terms  to  every  testament;  but  he  then 
may  be  requested  to  restore  the  inheritance  to  any  other  person  ; 
yet  without  an  heir  a  testament  is  ineffectual.    And  therefore, 
when  a  testatorsays  -  let  Lucius  TITIUS  be  my  heir  -  he  may 


B.  ii.  T.  xxiii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  113 

add and  I  request  you,  Lucius  TITIUS,  that,  as  soon  as  you 

enter  upon  my  inheritance,  you  would  restore  it  to  CAIUS  SEIUS. 
But  a  testator  is  at  liberty  to  request  his  heir  to  restore  a  part  of 
the  inheritance  only,  and  may  make  him  a  trustee  upon  condition, 
or  from  a  day  certain. 

Effect  of  the  Restitution  of  the  Inheritance. 

III.  After  an  heir  hath  restored  an  inheritance  in  obedience  to 
the  trust  reposed  in  him,  he  nevertheless  continues  heir.    But  he, 
who  hath  received  the  inheritance  from  such  fiduciary  heir,  is 
sometimes  reputed  to  be  in  the  place  of  the  heir,  and  sometimes 
in  the  place  of  a  legatary. 

Of  the  Trebellian  Senatus-Consultum. 

IV.  In  the  reign  of  NERO   the  emperor,  when  TREBELLIUS 
MAXIMUS  and  ANNJEUS  SENECA  were  consuls,  it  was  provided 
by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  that,  if  an  inheritance  was  restored  by 
reason  of  a  trust,  all  actions,  which  by  the  civil  law  might  be 
brought  by  or  against  the  heir,  should  be  given  to  and  against  him, 
to  whom  the  inheritance  was  restored. — And,  after  this  decree, 
the  praetor  began  to  give  equitable  and  beneficial  actions  to  and 
against  the  receiver  of  an  inheritance,  as  if  he  was  the  heir. 

Of  the  Pegasian  Senatus-Consultum. 

V.  But,  when  written  heirs  were  requested  to  restore  the  whole, 
or  almost  the  whole,  of  an  inheritance,  they  often  refused  to  ac- 
cept it,  since  they  could  receive  but  little  or  no  emolument;  and 
thus  it  happened,  that  trusts  were  frequently  extinguished.     But 
afterwards  in  the  consulate  of  Pegasus  and  Pugio,  in  the  reign  of 
the  emperor  Vespasian  the  senate  ordained  by  their  decree,  that 
an  heir,  who  was  requested  to  restore  an  inheritance,  might  retain 
a  fourth,  as  in  the  case  of  legacies  by  the  Falcidian  law.    And  an 
beir  is  also  allowed  to  make  the  same  deduction  from  particular 
things,  which  are  left  to  him  in  trust  for  the  benefit  of  another. 
For,  some  time  after  this  decree,  the  heir  alone  bore  the  burden, 
of  the  inheritance,  (i.  e.  all  the  charges  and  demands  incident  to 
it ;)  but  afterwards,  whoever  had  received  a  share  or  part  of  an  in- 
heritance, by  being  benefited  under  a  trust,  was  regarded  as  hav- 
ing a  partial  legacy;  and  this  species  of  legacy  was  called  parti- 
tion, because  the  legatary  took  a  part  of  the  inheritance  together 
with  the  heir ;  and  thence  it  arose,  that  the  same  stipulations, 
which  were  formerly  used  between  the  heir  and  legatary  in  part, 
were  also  interposed   between  the  person  benefited  under   the 
trust,  and  the  heir  or  trustee,  to  the  intent,    that  the  profit  and 
loss  might  be  in  common  between  them  in  due  proportion. 

VOL.  1.  No.  5.  ? 


114  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xxiii. 

Where  it  is  Applied. 

VI.  And  therefore,  if  a  written  heir,  or  heir  in  trust,  had  not 
been  requested  to  surrender  more  than  three  fourths  of  the  inhe- 
ritance, he  was  obliged  to  restore  so  much  of  it,  by  virtue  of  the 
TrebelHan  senatus-consultum  ;  and  all  actions,  whether  in  favour 
of,  or  against,  the  inheritance,  were  brought,  or  sustained,  by  the 
heir  and  fidei-commissary ,  according  to  their  respective  shares  ; 
and  this  obtains,  in  regard  to  the  heir,  by  virtue  of  the  civil  law  : 
and,  in  regard  to  thejidei-commissary,  by  virtue  of  the  TrebelHan 
decree.     But,  if  the  written  heir  was  requested  by  the  testator  to 
restore  the  whole  inheritance,  or  more  than  three  fourths,  then  the 
Pcgasian  senatus-consultum  took  place ;  for,  if  he  had  once  taken 
upon  himself  the  heirship  voluntarily,  he  was  obliged  to  sustain  all 
charges ;  and  this,  whether  he  did,  or  did  not,  retain  the  fourth,  to 
which  he  was  intitled.    But,  when  an  heir  retained  a  fourth  part, 
the  stipulations,  called  partis  et  pro  parte,  were  entered  into,  as 
between  a  legatary  in  part  and  an  heir;  and,  when  the  heir  did  not 
retain  a  fourth,  then  the  stipulations,  called  cmptce  et  venditce  hce- 
reditatis,  were  interposed.  But,  if  the  written  heir,  or  heir  in  trust, 
refused  to  accept  the  inheritance  on  suspicion,  that  there  would 
not  be  assets,  and  that  the^cceptance  would  be  detrimental  to  him, 
it  was  provided  by  the  Pcgasian  decree,  that  the  praetor,  at  the 
instance  of  the  jidei-commissary ,  might  compel  such  heir  to  take 
upon  himself  the  inheritance,  and  then  restore  it;  and  that  after- 
wards all  actions  should  be  brought  by  or  against  the  fidei-com- 
missary only ;  as  it  is  ordained  by  the  TrebelHan  decree.     And  in 
this  case  stipulations  are  not  necessary ;  for  the  heir,  who  restores 
the  inheritance,  is  made  effectually  secure,  and  all  hereditary  ac- 
tions are  transferred  to  and  against  him,  by  whom  the  inheritance 
is  received ;  there  being,  in  this  instance,  a  concurrence  of  both 
decrees,  the  Pegasian  and  the  TrebelHan. 
TrebelHan  Decree. 

VII.  But,  as  the  stipulations,  which  took  their  rise  from  the 
Pegasian  decree,  were  displeasing  even  to  the  antients  themselves, 
insomuch  that  Papiniant  a  man  of  a  true  sublime  genius,  does 
not  scruple  to  call  them  captious  in  some  cases,  and,  as  simplicity 
is  far  more  agreeable  to  us  in  all  matters  of  law,  than  unnecessary 
difficulties,  it  hath  therefore  pleased  us,  upon  comparing  the  agree- 
ment and  disagreement  of  each  decree,  to  abrogate  the  Pegasian, 
which  was  subsequent  to  the  Trebellian,  and  to  transfer  a  greater 
authority  to  the  TrebelHan  decree,  by  which  all  fdei-commissary 
inheritances  shall  be  restored  for  the  future,  whether  the  testator 
hath  given  by  his  will  a  fourth  part  of  his  estate  to  his  written 


B.  it.  T.  xxiir.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  115 


or  more  or  less  than  a  fourth,  or  even  nothing ;  so  that,  when  either 
nothing  is  given  to  the  heir,  or  less  than  a  fourth  part,  he  may  be 
permitted  to  retain  a  fourth,  or  as  much  as  will  complete  the  de- 
ficiency, by  virtue  of  our  authority,  or  even  to  demand  a  repay- 
ment of  what  he  hath  paid  in  his  own  wrong,  all  actions  being 
divided  between  the  heir  and  the  fidei-commissary  in  a  just  pro- 
portion according  to  the  Trebellian  decree.  But,  if  the  heir  spon- 
taneously restores  the  whole  inheritance,  all  actions  must  be 
brought  either  by  or  against  thejidei-commissary.  And,  whereas 
it  was  the  principal  effect  of  the  power  of  the  Pegasian  decree, 
that,  when  a  written  heir  had  refused  to  accept  an  inheritance, 
he  might  be  constrained  to  take  it,  and  restore  it,  at  the  instance 
of  thejidei-commissary,  to  whom,  and  against  whom,  all  actions 
passed,  we  have  transferred  that  power  to  the  Trebellian  decree  ; 
so  that  this  is  now  the  only  law,  by  which  a  fiduciary  heir  can  be 
compelled  to  enter  upon  the  inheritance,  when  the  fidei-commis- 
sary  is  desirous,  that  it  should  be  restored  ;  and  the  heir,  in  this 
case,  can  neither  receive  profit,  nor  suffer  loss. 

The  application  of  what  is  above  said. 

VIII.  But  it  makes  no  difference,   whether  an  heir,  who  is  in- 
stituted to  the  whole  of  an  inheritance,  is  requested  by  the  testator 
to  restore  the  whole  or  a  part  of  it  only — or  whether  an  heir,  who 
is  nominated  but  to  a  part  of  an  inheritance,  is  requested  to  restore 
that  intire  part,   or  only  a  portion  of  it  ;  for  we  have  ordained, 
that  the  same  rule  of  law  shall  be  observed,  whether  an  heir  is 
requested  to  restore  the  whole  or  a  part  only  of  an  inheritance. 

Farther  Effects  of  this  Decree. 

IX.  If  an  heir  is  requested  by  a  testator  to  give  up  an  inheri- 
tance, after  deducting  some  specific  thing,  amounting  to  a  fourth, 
as  a  piece  of  ground,  &c.  he  may  be  compelled  to  give  it  up  by 
the  Trebellian  decree,  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  he  had  been  re- 
quested to  restore  the  remainder  of  an  inheritance,  after  reserving 
to  himself  a  fourth.  There  is  however  this  difference,  that,  in  the 
one  case,   when  an  heir  is  requested  to  give  up  an  inheritance, 
after  deducting  a  particular  thing,  then  all  actions,  passive  as  well 
as  active,  are  transferred  by  virtue  of  the  decree  to  the  fidei-co.m- 
missary,  and  what  remains  with  the  heir  is  free  of  all   incum- 
brance,  as  if  acquired  by  legacy ;  and,  in  the  other  case,  when  an 
heir  is  requested  in  general  terms  to  give  up  an  inheritance,  after 
retaining  a  fourth  to  himself,  all  actions  are  proportionably  di- 
vided ;  those,  which  regard  the  three  fourths  of  the  estate,  being 
transferred  to  the  fidei-commlssary ;  and  those,  which  regard  to 
the  single  fourth,  remaining  for  the  benefit  of  the  heir.  And,  even 


116  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  n.  T.  XXIIT. 

if  an  heir  is  requested  to  give  up  an  inheritance,  after  making  a 
deduction  of  some  particular  thing,  which  amounts  to  the  value 
of  the  greatest  »mrt  of  it,  all  actions,  both  active  and  passive,  are 
nevertheless  transferred  to  thejidei-commissary,\\ho  ought  there- 
fore always  well  to  consider,  whether  it  will  be  expedient  or  not, 
that  the  inheritance  should  be  given  up  to  him.  And  the  law  is 
the  same,  whether  an  heir  is  requested  to  give  up  an  inheritance 
after  a  deduction  of  two,  or  more,  specific  things— or  of  a  certain 
sum  of  money,  which  exceeds  in  value  the  greatest  part  of  the 
inheritance.  Thus  what  we  have  said  of  an  heir,  who  is  insti- 
tuted to  the  whole  of  an  inheritance,  is  equally  true  of  him,  who 
is  instituted  only  to  a  part. 

Of  Fiduciary  Bequests. 

X.  And  farther,  even  a  man,  who  is  willing  to  die  intestate, 
may  request  the  person,  which  he  thinks  will  succeed  him,  either 
by  the   civil  or  praetorian  law,  to  give  up  the  whole  inheritance, 
or  a  part  of  it,  or  any  particular  thing,  as  a  piece  of  ground,  a  slave, 
a   sum  of  money,  &c.     But  this  liberty  is  granted  to  intestates 
in  regard  to  trusts  only ;  for  legacies   are  not  valid,  unless  they 
are  bequeathed  by  testament. 

Of  Fidci-Commissaries. 

XI.  A  Jidei-commissary  may  also  himself  be  requested  to  pay 
over,  or  give  up,  to  another,  either  the  whole,  or  a  part,  of  what 
he  receives ;  or  even  to  give  some  other  thing  in  lieu  of  it. 

Of  the  Proof  of  Fiduciary  Trusts. 

XII.  All  fiduciary  gifts  or  bequests  depended  formerly  in  a 
precarious  manner  upon  the  sole  faith  of  the  heir;   from  which 
they  took  as  well  their  name  as  their  essence;   and  the  emperor 
Augustus  was  the  first,  who  thought  it  proper  to  reduce  them 
under  a  judicial  cognizance.     But  we  have  since  endeavoured  to 
exceed  that  prince;   and  at  the  instance  of  that  most  excellent 
man  Tribonian,  the  quasstor  of  our  palace,  we  have  enacted  by 
our  constitution,  that,  if  a  testator  hath  trusted  to  the  faith  of  his 
heir  for  the  surrender  of  an  inheritance,  or  any  particular  thing, 
and  this  trust  can  not  be  made  manifest  by  the  depositions  of  five 
witnesses,  (which  is  known  to  be  the  legal  number  in  such  cases,) 
there  having  been  not  so  many,  or  perhaps  no  witnesses  present, 
the  heir  at  the  same  time  perfidiously  refusing  to  make  any  pay- 
ment, and  denying  the  whole  transaction,  then  in  this  case  the 
Jidei-commissary,  having  previously  taken  the  oath  of  calumny, 
may  put  the  heir,  although  he  is  even  the  son  of  the  testator,  to 
his  oath,  and  thus  force  him  either  to  deny  the  trust  upon  oath,  or 
comply  with  it,  whether  the  trust  is  universal  or  particular;  and 


B.  ii.  T.  xxiv.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  117 

this  is  allowed,  lest  the  last  will  of  a  testator,  committed  to  the 
faith  of  an  heir,  should  be  defeated.  And  we  have  thought  it 
right,  that  the  same  remedy  should  be  taken  against  a  legatary,  or 
even  a  fidei-commissary ,  to  whom  a  testator  hath  left  any  thing 
with  a  request  to  give  it  up.  And,  if  any  man,  to  whom  some- 
thing hath  been  left  in  trust  to  be  given  to  another,  shou Id  confess 
the  trust,  after  he  hath  denied  it,  but  endeavour  at  the  same  time 
to  shelter  himself  under  the  subtility  of  the  law,  he  may  never- 
theless be  compelled  to  perform  his  duty. 


TITLE  XXIV. 

OF    WHAT  MAY  BE  LEFT  IN  FIDUCIARY  TRUST. 

Summary. 
A  MAN  may  also  leave  particular  things  in  trust;  as  a  field, 

silver,  cl oaths,  or  a  certain  sum  of  money ;- and  may  request 

either  his  heir  to  restore  them,  or  even  a  legatary :   although  a 
legatary  can  not  be  made  chargeable  with  a  legacy. 
Subjects  of  such  Trust. 

I.  A  testator  may  leave  not  only  his  own  property  in  trust,  but 
also  the  property  of  his  heir,  of  a  legatary,  of  a  fidei-commissary, 
or  of  any  other:   so  that  a  legatary  or  fidei-commissary  may  not 
only  be  requested  to  give  what  hath  been  left  to  him,  but  what  is 
his  own,  or  even  what  is  the  property  of  another.     And  the  only 
caution  necessary  to  be  observed  by  the  testator  is,  that  no  man 
be  requested  to  give  more,  than  he  hath  received  by  means  of  the 
testament;  for  the  excess  will  be  ineffectually  bequeathed.     And, 
when  the  property  of  another  is  left  in  trust,  the  person,  requested 
to  restore  it,  is  obliged  either  to  obtain  from  the  proprietor  the 
very  thing  bequeathed,  or  to  pay  the  value  of  it. 

Of  the  Liberty  of  Slaves. 

II.  Liberty  may  also  be  conferred  upon  a  slave  by  virtue  of  a 
trust :  for  an  heir,  a  legatary,  or  a  fidti-commissary,   may  be  re- 
quested to  manumit:   nor  does  it  make  any  difference,  whether 
the  testator  requests  the  manumission  of  his  own  slave,  of  the 
slave  of  his  heir,  of  the  slave  of  a  legatary,  or  of  the  slave  of  a 
stranger:  and  therefore,  when  a  slave  is  not  a  testator's  own  pro- 
perty, he  must  be  bought,  if  possible,  and  manumitted.     But,  if 
the  proprietor  of  the  slave  refuses  to  sell  him,  (which  refusal  the 
proprietor  may  justify,  if  he  hath  taken  nothing  under  the  will  of 
the  testator,)  yet  the  fiduciary  bequest  is  not  extinguished,   but 
deferred  only,  till  it  can  be  conveniently  performed.     It  is  here  to 
be  observed,  that  he,  who  is  manumitted  in  consequence  of  a 


US  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  11.  T.  xxiv. 

trust,  does  not  become  the  freed  man  of  the  testator,  although  he 
was  the  testator's  own  slave,  but  he  becomes  the  freed  man  of  the 
manumittor  :  but  a  slave,  to  whom  liberty  is  directly  given  by 
testament,  becomes  the  freedman  of  the  testator,  and  is  called 
Orcinus;  and  no  one  can  obtain  liberty  directly  by  testament, 
unless  he  was  the  slave  of  the  testator,  not  only  at  the  time  of 
the  testator's  death,  but  also  at  the  time  of  the  making  of  his 
testament.  And  liberty  is  understood  to  be  directly  given,  not 
when  a  testator  requests  that  his  slave  shall  be  made  free  by  an- 
other, but  when  he  commands  that  the  freedom  of  his  slave  shall 
commence  instantly  by  virtue  of  his  testament. 
Of  the  verbal  Form  of  Trusts. 

III.  The  terms  generally  used  in  the  commitment  of  trusts  are 
the  following  :—peto,  rogo,  volo,  mando^fidei  tuce  committo: — any 
of  which  words,  singly  taken,  is  as  firm  and  binding,  as  if  all 
were  joined  together. 

TITLE  XXV. 

OF  CODICILS. 

Origin  of  Codicils. 

IT  is  certain,  that  codicils  were  not  in  frequent  use  before  the 
reign  of  Augustus :  for  Lucius  Lentulus,  by  whose  means  trusts 
became  efficacious,  was  the  first,  who  caused  authority  to  be  given 
to  codicils.  When  he  was  dying  in  Africa,  he  wrote  several  co- 
dicils, which  were  confirmed  by  his  testament ;  and  in  these  he 
requested  Augustus  to  perform  some  particular  act  in  consequence 
of  a  trust:  the  Emperor  complied  with  the  request;  and  many 
other  persons  afterwards,  being  influenced  by  the  authority  of  the 
Emperor's  example,  punctually  performed  trusts,  which  had  been 
committed  to  their  charge:  and  the  daughter  of  Lentulus  paid 
debts  which,  in  strictness  of  law,  were  not  due.  But  it  is  re- 
ported, that  Augustus,  having  convened  upon  this  occasion  the 
sages  of  the  law,  and  also  Trebatius,  whose  opinion  was  of  the 
greatest  authority,  demanded,  whether  codicils  could  be  admitted 
to  be  of  force,  and  whether  they  were  not  repugnant  to  the 
very  reason  of  the  law?  to  which  Trebatius  answered,  that  co- 
dicils were  not  only  most  convenient,  but  most  necessary,  on  ac- 
count of  the  great  and  long  voyages,  which  the  Romans  were  fre- 
quently obliged  to  take,  to  the  intent,  that  where  a  man  could  not 
make  a  testament,  he  might  bequeath  his  effects  by  codicil.  And 
afterwards,  when  Labeo,  a  lawyer  of  great  eminence,  disposed  of 
his  own  property  by  codicil,  it  was  no  longer  a  doubt,  but  that 
codicils  might  be  legally  allowed. 


B.  ii.  T.  xxii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  119 

A  n tecedent  Codicils. 

I.  Not  only  he,  who  hath  already  made  his  testament,  is  per- 
mitted to  make  a  codicil,  but  even  an  intestate  may  commit  a 
trust  to  others  by  codicil :  yet,  when  a  codicil  is  antecedent  to  a 
testament,  the  codicil,  according  to  Papinian,   cannot  otherwise 
take  effect,  than  by  being  confirmed  by  the  subsequent  testament. 
But  the  emperors  SEVERUS  and  ANTONINUS  have  by  rescript 
declared,  that  a  thing,  left  in  trust  in  a  codicil  preceding  a  testa- 
ment, may  be  demanded  by  a  fidei-commissary ,  if  it  appears  that 
the  testator  hath  not  receded  from  the  intention,  which  he  at 
first  expressed  in  his  codicil. 

An  Inheritance  not  given  by  Codicil. 

II.  But  an  inheritance  can  neither  be  given  nor  taken  away  by 
codicil,  lest  the  different  operations  of  testaments  and  codicils 
should  be  confounded :  and  of  course  an  heir  cannot  be  disin- 
herited by  codicil. But  although  an  inheritance  can  neither  be 

given  nor  taken  away  by  codicil,  in  direct  terms,  yet  it  may  be 
legally  left  from  the  heir  in  a  codicil,  by  means  of  a  trust  orfidei- 
commissum.     But  no  man  is  allowed  to  impose  a  condition  upon 
his  heir  by  a  codicil,  nor  to  substitute  directly. 

Of  the  Plurality  of  Codicils. 

III.  A  man  may  make  many  codicils,  and  they  require  no 
solemnity. 


.   •-..-. 

THE 

INSTITUTIONS 

.  ,  .      J^V* 

itfilHH*t»'-toiBiffK»    n^xS^/^ig  «  u«fj  'Sfrt, 

ELEMENTS  OF  JUSTINIAN. 

3$oofe  tfit  CStrtr* 

i .» i7  j«  i  v«i .  a*   • 

,  t  ==        ~.vqtHijj$t 

TITLE  I. 

Or  INHERITANCES  WHICH  ARE  LEFT  BY  AN  INTESTATE. 
EV ER  Y  person  is  said  to  d  ie  intestate,  who  hath  either  not  made 
a  testament ;  or,  if  he  has  made  one,  hath  neglected  to  use  the 
solemnities  prescribed  by  law.  A  man  is  also  said  to  die  intes- 
tate, if  his  testament,  although  rightly  made,  is  either  cancelled 
or  rendered  void  ;  or  if  no  one  will  take  upon  himself  the  heir* 
ship  by  virtue  of  the  testament. 

First  Order. 

I.  The  inheritances  of  intestates,  according  to  the  law  of  the 
twelve  tables,  belong  primarily  to  the  sui  hceredes,  i.  e.  to  the 
proper  or  domestic  heirs  of  such  intestates. 

Who  are  proper  Heirs. 

II.  And,  as  we  have  observed  before,  those  are  esteemed  sui 
hceredes,  or  proper  heirs,  who,  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  the  de- 
ceased, were  under  his  power ;  as  a  son  or  a  daughter,  a  grandson 
or  a  grand-daughter  by  a  son,  a  great-grandson  or  great-grand- 
daughter by  a  grandson  of  a  son,  $c. neither  is  it  material, 

whether  these  children  are  natural  or  adopted.     But,  in  the  num- 
ber of  natural  children,  we  must  reckon  these,  who,  although 
they  were  not  born  in  lawful  wedlock,  are,  nevertheless,  accord- 
ing to  the  tenor  of  the  imperial  constitutions,  intitled  to  the  rights 
of  proper  heirs,  by  being  admitted  into  the  order  of  Decurions. 
We  must  also  add  those  persons,  who  are  comprised  within  our 
own  constitutions,  by  which  it  is  ordained,  that,  if  any  person, 
without  intending  matrimony,  shall  keep  a  woman,  with  whom 
he  is  not  prohibited  to  marry,  and  have  children  by  her,  and  shall 
afterwards,  through  the  dictates  of  affection,  marry  that  woman, 
and  have  other  children  by  her,  sons  or  daughters,  then  not  only 


in.  T.  i. 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


these  latter  children,  born  after  the  celebration  of  marriage,  shall 
be  legitimate,  and  in  the  power  of  their  father,  but  also  the 
former,  who  gave  occasion  to  the  legitimacy  of  those  who  were 
born  afterwards.  And  we  have  thought  it  expedient,  that  this 
law  shall  also  obtain  in  regard  to  the  children  born  before  mar- 
riage, although  the  children  born  subsequent  to  it  are  dead  ;  or 
even  although  there  never  were  any  children  subsequent  to  the 
marriage.  But  a  grandson  or  grand-daughter,  a  great-grandson 
or  great-grand-daughter,  is  not  reckoned  in  the  number  of  proper 
heirs,  unless  the  person  preceding  them  in  degree  hath  ceased  to 
be  under  paternal  power,  either  by  death  or  some  other  means, 
as  by  emancipation  :  for,  if  a  son,  when  his  father  died,  was  un- 
der the  power  of  his  father,  the  grandson  can  by  no  means  be 
the  proper'or  domestic  heir  of  his  grand-father;  and,  by  a  parity 
of  reasoning,  this  rule  is  understood  to  take  place  in  relation  to 
all  descendants  in  the  right  line.  But  all  posthumous  children, 
-who  would  have  been  under  the  power  of  their  father,  if  they  had 
been  born  in  his  life-time,  are  esteemed  sui  hceredes,  or  proper 
heirs. 

Incompetence. 

III.  Persons  may  become  suihceredes,  or  proper  heirs,  without 
their  knowledge,  and  even  although  they  are  disordered  in  their 
senses  :  for,  as  inheritances  may  be  acquired  without  our  know- 
ledge, it  is  a  consequence,  that   they  may   also  be  acquired  by 
persons  deprived  of  their  understanding.     And  here  observe,  that 
the  dominion  of  an  inheritance  is  continued  in  the  heir  from  the 
very  instant  of  the  death  of  his  ancestor,  and  that  the  authority 
of  a  tutor  is  not  necessary  to  enable  a  pupil  to  inherit,  because 
inheritances  may  be   acquired   by   proper  heirs,  without  their 
knowledge:  neither  does  a  disordered  person  inherit  by  the  assent 
of  his  curator,  but  by  operation  of  law. 

Of  Posthumous  Heirs. 

IV.  But  sometimes  a  child  becomes  a  proper  heir,  although  he 
was  not  under  power,  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  his  parent;  as 
when  a  person  returns  from  captivity  after  the  death  of  his  father: 
end  this  is  effected  by  ihejuspostliminii,  or  right  of  return. 

Of  Infamous  Persons. 

V.  On  the  contrary,  it  may  happen,  that  a  child,  who,  at  the 
time  of  the  death  of  his  parent,   was  under  his  power,  shall  not 
be  his  proper  heir  :  as  when  a  parent,   after  his   decease,  is  ad- 
judged to  have  been  guilty  of  lese-majesty,  by  which  crime   his 
memory  is  rendered  infamous;  for  a   criminal  of  this  sort  can 
have  no  proper  heir,  inasmuch  as  all  his  possessions  are  forfeited 

VOL.  1.    NO.  5.  Q 


i2.2  THE  INSTITUTES B.  in.  *.  r. 

to  the  treasury.  But  a  son,  in  this  case,  may  strictly  be  said  to 
have  been  the  proper  heir  of  his  father,  and  afterwards  to  have 
ceased  to  be  so. 

Of  the  Division  of  an  Inheritance. 

VI.  When  there  is  a  son  or  a   daughter,  and  a  grandson  or 
grand-daughter  by   another  sort,  they  are   called  equally  to  the 
inheritance  of  their  parents  ;  nor  does  the  nearest  exclude  the 
more  remote;  for  it  appears  just,   that  grandsons   and   grand- 
daughters should  succeed  in  the  place  of  their  father.     And,  by 
the  same  reasoning,  if  there  is  a  grandson  or  grand-daughter  by 
a  son,  and  a  great-grandson  or  great-grand-daughter  by  a  grand- 
son, they  ought  all  to  be  called  to  the  inheritance.     And,  inas- 
much as  it  hath  been  esteemed  right,  that  grandsons.and  grand- 
daughters,   great-grandsons    and   great-grand-daughters,  should 
succeed  in  the  place  of  their  parent,  it  seemed  convenient,  that 
inheritances  should  not  be  divided  into  capita,  but  into  stirpcs  .- 
so  that,  where  there  is  a  son  and  grand-children  by  another  son, 
the  son  possesses  half  the  inheritance,  and  the   grand-children, 
however  numerous,  are  entitled  only  to  the  other  half,  as  the 
representatives  of  their  father.     And  in  like  manner,  where  there 
are  grandchildren  by  two  sons,  the  one  son  leaving  one  or  two 
children,  and  the  other  three  or  four,   the  inheritance   must  be 
equally  divided,  half  belonging  to  the  single  grand-child,  or  the 
two  grandchildren  by   the  one  son,  and  half  to   the  three  or 
four  grand-children  by  the  other  son. 

When  Heirs  become  so, 

VII.  Whenever  it  is  demanded,  whether  any  person  is  a  pro* 
per  heir,  we  must  enquire  at  what  time  it  was  certain,  that  the 
deceased  died  without  a  testament;  and  a  man   is  said  to  die 
without  a  testament,  if  his  testament  is  relinquished.     Thus  if  a 
son  is  disinherited  and  a  stranger  is  instituted  heir,  and,  after  the 
death  of  the  son,  it  becomes  certain,  that  the  instituted   heir  was 
not  in  fact  the  heir,  either  because  he  was  unwilling*  or  unable, 
to  accept  the  inheritance,  in  this  case,  the  grandson  of  the  deceased 
becomes   the   proper   heir  of  his  grandfather  :  for  at  that  time, 
when  it  was  certain,  that  the  deceased  died  intestate,  there  was 
no  other  heir,  but  the  grandchild;  and  this  is  evident 

Of  Posthumous  Grandchildren. 

VIII.  And  although  a  child  is  born  after  the  death  of  his  grand- 
father, yet,  if  he   was  conceived    in  the  life-time  of  his  grand- 
father, he  will,  at  the  death  of  his  father  and  after  his  grand- 
father's testament  is  deserted  by  the  instituted  heir,  become  the 
proper  heir  of  his  grandfather.     But,  if  a  child  is  both  conceived 


in.  T.  i. 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


and  born  after  the  death  of  his  grandfather,  such  child,  although 
his  father  should  die  and  the  testament  of  his  grandfather  be 
deserted,  could  not  become  the  proper  heir  of  his  grandfather  ; 
because  he  was  never  allied  to  his  grandfather  by  any  tye  of  cog- 
nation :  neither  is  he,  whom  an  emancipated  son  hath  adopted,  to 
be  reckoned  in  any  respect  among  the  children  of  his  adoptive; 
father's  father.  So  that  the  adopted  children  of  an  emancipated 
son  can  neither  become  the  proper  heirs  of  their  father's  father  in 
regard  to  the  inheritance,  nor  demand  the  possession  of  goods,  as 
next  of  kin.  This  is  what  we  have  thought  it  expedient  to 
observe  concerning  proper  heirs. 

Of  Emancipated  Children. 

IX.  Emancipated  children  by  the  civil  law  have  no  right  to 
the  inheritances  of  their  parents  ;  for  those  are  not  proper  heirs, 
who  have  ceased  to  be  under  the  power  of  their  parent  deceased, 
before  his  death,  neither  are  they  called  to  inherit  by  any  other 
right  according  to  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables.     But  the  praetor, 
induced  by  natural  equity,  grants  them  the  possession  of  goods, 
by  the  edict  beginning,  unde  liberi,  as  fully,  as  if  they  had  been 
under  power  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  their  parent  ;  and  the 
praetor  grants  this,  whether  they  are  sole,  or  mixed  with  others, 
who  are  proper  heirs  :  therefore,  when  there  are  two  sons,  the  one 
emancipated,  and  the  other  under  power  at  the  time  of  his  father's 
death,  the  latter,  by  the  civil  law,  is  alone  the  heir,  and  alone  the 
proper  heir:  but,  when  the  emancipated  son,  by  the  indulgence 
of  the  praetor,  is  admitted  to  his  share,  then  the  proper  heir 
becomes  the  heir  only  of  his  own  moity. 

//  an  Emancipated  Child  shall  become  an  Adopted  one, 

X.  But  those,  who  after  emancipation  have  given  themselves 
in  adoption,  are  not  admitted,  as  children,  to  the  possession  of  the 
effects  of  their  natural  father,  if,  at  the  time  of  his  death,  they 
were    in    the  adoptive  family.     But,  if  in   the  life-time  of  their 
natural  father  they  were  emancipated  by  their  adoptive  father, 
they  are  then  admitted  by  the  praetor  to  take  the  goods  of  their 
natural  father,  as  if  they  had  been  emancipated  by  him,  and  had 
never  entered  into  the  family  of  the  adopter:    and  consequently, 
in  regard  to  their  adoptive  father,  they  are  looked  upon  as  mere 
strangers.     But  those,   who  are  emancipated  by  their  adoptive 
father,  after  the  death  of  their  natural  father,  are  nevertheless 
reputed  strangers  to  their  adoptive  father:    and,  in  regard  to  the 
inheritance  of  their  natural  father,  they   are  not  at  all   the  more 
intitled  to  reassume  the  rank  of  children.     These  rules  of  law 

have  been  established,  inasmuch  as  it  was  unjust,  that  it  should 

-          ' 


124  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  m.  T.  r. 

be  in  the  power  of  an  adopter  to  determine  at  his  pleasure,  to 
whom  the  inheritance  of  a  natural  father  should  appertain,  whether 
to  his  children,  or  to  his  agnates. 

Comparison  of  Natural  and  Adopted  Children. 

XI.  Adopted  children  have  therefore  fewer  rights  and  privileges, 
than  natural  children:  for  natural  children,  even  after  emancipa- 
tion, retain  the  rank  of  children  by  the  indulgence  of  the  praetor, 
although  they  lose  it  by  the  civil  law :  but  adopted  children,  when 
emancipated,  lose  the  rank  of  children  by  the  civil  16W,  and  are 
denied  admittance  into  the  rank  of  children  by  the  praetor;  and 
not  without  reason:   for  civil  policy  can  by  no  means  destroy 
natural  rights;  nor  can  natural  children  ever  cease  to  be  sons  and 
daughters,  grandsons  and  grand-daughters,   although  they  may 
cease  to  be  proper  heirs ;  but  adopted  children,  when  emancipated, 
commence  instantly  strangers ;   for  the  right  and  name  of  son  or 
daughter,  which  were  obtained  by  the  civil  right  of  adoption, 
may  be  destroyed  by  another  civil  right;    namely,  by  emanci- 
pation. 

Of  the  possession  of  Goods  contrary  to  the  Tables. 

XII.  The  same  rules  are  observed  in  regard  to  that  possession 
of  goods,  which  the  praetor,  contrary  to  the  testament  of  the 
parent,  grants  to  the  children,  who  are  not  mentioned  in  the  tes- 
tament, that  is,  to  such,  who  are  neither  instituted  heirs,  nor 
properly  disinherited.     For  the  praetor  calls  those,  who  were 
under  power  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  their  parents,  and  those 
also,  who  are  emancipated,  to  the  same  possession  of  goods;  but 
he  repels  those,  who  were  in  an  adoptive  family  at  the  time  of  the 
decease  of  their  natural  parents.     And  as  the  praetor  admits  not 
those  adopted  children,  who  have  been  emancipated  by  their 
adoptive  father,  to  succeed  him  ab  intestato,  much  less  therefore 
does  the  praetor  admit  such  children  to  possess  the  goods  of  their 
adoptive  father  contrary  to  his  testament;  for,  by  virtue  of  the 
emancipation,  they  cease  to  be  in  the  number  of  his  children. 

Whence  are  Cognates. 

XIII.  We  must  nevertheless  observe,  that,  although  those,  who 
were  in  an  adoptive  family,  but  have  been  emancipated  by  their 
adoptive  father,  after  the  decease  of  their  natural  father,  dying 
intestate,  are  not  admitted  by  that  part  of  the  edict,  by  which 
children  are  called   to  the  possession  of  goods,  yet  they  are  ad- 
mitted by  another  part,  by  which  the  cognates  of  the  deceased  are 
called  to  the  possession  of  his  effects.     But,  by  this  last-named 
part  of  the  edict,  the  cognates  are  only  called,  when  there  is  no 
opposition  from  proper  heirs,  emancipated  children,  or  agnates: 


B,  in.  T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN/  125 

for  the  praetor  first  calls  the  proper  heirs  with  the  emancipated 

children,  then  the  agnates,  and  lastly  the  nearest  cognates,  r*  rntij? 

Emendation  of  the  Antient  Law. 

XIVr.  These  were  the  rules  of  law,  which  formerly  obtained; 
but  they  have  received  some  emendation  from  the  constitution, 
which  we  promulged,  relating  to  those  persons,  who  are  given  in 
adoption  by  their  natural  parents :  for  we  have  found  frequent 
instances  of  sons,  who  by  adoption  have  lost  their  succession  to 
their  natural  parents,  and  who,  by  the  ease  with  which  adoption 
is  dissolved  by  emancipation,  have  also  lost  the  right  of  succeeding1 
to  their  adoptive  parents.  We  therefore,  correcting  as  usual 
whatever  is  amiss,  have  enacted  a  constitution,  by  which  it  is 
decreed,  that,  when  a  natural  father  hath  given  his  son  in  adoption, 
all  the  rights  of  such  son  shall  nevertheless  be  preserved  intire,  in 
the  same  manner,  as  if  he  had  still  remained  under  the  power  of 
his  natural  father,  and  there  had  been  no  adoption;  except  only, 
that  the  person  adopted  may  succeed  to  his  adopter,  if  he  dies 
intestate.  And  it  is  also  enacted,  that,  if  the  adopter  makes,  a 
testament  and  omits  the  name  .of  his  adopted  son,  such  son  can 
neither  by  the  civil  nor  the  .praetorian  law  obtain  any  part  of  the 
inheritance,  whether  he  demands  the  possession  of  the  effect* 
contra  tabulas  testamenti,  (contrary  to  the  letter  of  the  testament,) 
or  prefers  a  complaint,  alleging,  that  the  testament  is  inofficious: 
for  an  adopter  is- under  no  obligation  either  to  institute,  or  disin- 
herit, his  adopted  son,  inasmuch  as  there  subsists  not  between 
them  any  natural  tye  or  relation.  And  we  have  farther  decreed, 
that  no  adopted  person  shall  receive  any  benefit  from  theSabinian 
senatvs-consultum,  by  being  one  of  three  sons:  for  in  this  case  he 
shall  neither  obtain  the  fourth  part  of  his  adoptive  father's  effects, 
nor  be  intitled  to  any  action  upon  that  account.  But  all  those, 
who  are  adopted  by  their  natural  parents,  i.  e.  by  a  grand-father 
or  great-grand-father,  &c.  are  excepted  in  our  constitution:  for*- 
inasmuch  as  such  persons  are  united  together  by  the  concurrence 
both  of  natural  and  civil  rights,  we  have  thought  proper  to  retain 
the  old  law  in  relation  to  those  adoptions;  in  the  same  manner, 
as  when  the  father  of  a  family  hath  given  himself  ia  arrogation. 
But  all,  which  we  have  here  observed,  may  be  collected  from  the 
tenor  of  the  above-mentioned  constitution. 

Of  Descendants  from  Females. 

XV.  The  antient  law,  shewing  most  favour  to  descendants  from 
males,  called  those  grand-children  only,  who  were  so  descended, 
to  the  succession  as  proper  heirs,  and  preferred  them  by  the  right 
of  agnation  :  for  the  old  law,  reputing  the  grand-children  born  of 


126  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  m.  T.  i. 



daughters,  and  the  great-grand-children  born  of  grand-daughters, 
to  be  cognates,  prohibited  such  children  from  succeeding  to  their 
grand-father  and  great-grand-father,   maternal   or  paternal,  till 
after  the  line  of  agnati  was  exhausted.     But  the  emperors  Vaten- 
tinian,  Theodosius,  and  Arcadius,  would  not  suffer  such  a  vio- 
lence against  nature  to  continue  in  practice;  and,  inasmuch  as 
the  name  of  grand-child  and  great-grand-child   is  undoubtedly 
common,  as  well  to  descendants  by  females,  as  to  descendants 
by  males,  they  therefore  granted  an  equal  right  6f  succession  to 
descendants  from  males  and  descendants  from  females.     But,  to 
the  end  that  those  persons,  who  have  been  favoured  by  nature,  as 
well  as  by  the  suifrage  of  antiquity,  might  enjoy  some  peculiar 
privileges,  the  same  emperors  have  thought  it  right,  that  the  por- 
tions of  grand-children,  great-grand-children,   and  other  lineal 
descendants  of  a  female,  should  be  somewhat  diminished,  and 
therefore   they  have  not  permitted   such  persons  to  receive  so 
much  by  a  third  part,  as  their  mother  or  grand-mother  would 
have  received;  or  their  father  or  grand-father,  paternal  or  ma- 
ternal, at  the  decease  of  a  female ;  for  we  now  treat  concerning 
inheritances,   derived  from  a  female :  and,  although  there  were 
only  grand-children  by  a  female  to  take  an  inheritance,  yet  the 
emperors  did  not  call  the  agnates  to  the  succession.    And  as, 
upon  the  decease  of  a  son,  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables  calls  the 
grand-children,  and  great-grand-children,  male  and  female,  to  re- 
present their  father  in  respect  to  the  succession  of  their  grand- 
father, so  the  imperial  ordinance  calls  them  to  succession  in  the 
place  of  their  mother  or  grand-mother,  with  the  before-regulated 
diminution  of  a  third  part  of  their  share.     But,  as  there  still  re- 
mained matter  of  dispute  between  the  agnati  and  the  above- 
named  grand-children,  the  agnati  claiming  the  fourth  part  of  the 
estate  of  the  deceased  by  virtue  of  a  certain  constitution,  we  have 
therefore  not  permitted  it  to  be  inserted  into  our  Code  from  that 
of  Theodosius.    And  we  have  farther  taken  care  to  alter  the  eld 
law  by  our  ordinance,  having  enacted,  that  agnates  shall  not  be 
intitled  to  any  part  of  the  goods  of  the  deceased,  whilst  grand- 
children born  of  a  daughter,  or  great-grand-children  born  of  a 
grand-daughter,   or  any  other  descendants  from  a  female  in  the 
right  line,  are  living ;  lest  those,   who  proceed  from  the  trans- 
verse line,  should  be  preferred  to  lineal  descendants.     And  we 
now  decree,  that  this  our  ordinance  shall  obtain  according  to  its 
full  tenor.     But  as  the  old  law  ordered,  that  every  inheritance 
should  be  divided  into  stirpes,  and  not  into  capita,  between  the  son 
of  the  deceased  and  his  grandsons  by  a  son,  sp  we  also  ordain, 


»•.  ni.  T.  T.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  127 

that  distribution  shall  be  made  in  the  same  manner  between  sons 
und  grandsons  by  a  daughter,  and  between  all  grandsons  and 
grand-daughters,  great  grandsons  and  great-grand-daughters,  and 
all  other  descendants  in  a  right  line;  so  that  the  issue  either  of  a 
mother  or  a  father,  or  of  a  grand-mother  or  a  grand-father,  may 
obtain  their  portions  without  any  diminution;  and,  if  on  the  one 
part  there  should  be  only  one  or  two  claimants,  and  on  the  other 
part  three  or  four,  that  the  greater  number  shall  be  intitled 
only  to  one  half,  and  the  less  number  to  the  other  half  of  the 
inheritance. 

TITLE  IL 

OF  THE  LEGITIMATE  SUCCESSION^  OF  A&NATES. 

The  second  Order  of  legitimate  Heirs. 

WHEN  it  happens,  that  there  are  no  proper  heirs  to  succeed 
the  deceased,  nor  any  of  those  persons 'whom  the  praetor  or 
the  constitutions  would  call  to  inherit  with  proper  heirs,  then 
the  inheritance,  by  a  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  appertains  to  the 
nearest  agnate. 

Of  natural  Agnate*. 

r '-'-I.  Agnates,  as- we  have  observed  in  the  first  book,  are  those* 
who  are  related  or  cognated  by  males,  (quasi  a  patre  cognati :) 
and  therefore  brothers,  who  are  the  sons  of  the  same  father,  are 
agnates  in  regard  to  each  other ;  they  are  also  called  consanguinei, 
being  of  the  same  blood  ;  but  it  is  not  required  that  they  should 
have  the  same  mother.  An  uncle  is  also  agnated  to  his  brother's 
«ori,  and  vice  versa  the  brother's  son  to  his  paternal  uncle  :  and 
brothers  patruel,  that  is,  the  children  of  brothers,  who  are  also 
called  consobrini,  are  likewise  reckoned  agnates.  In  this  manner 
we  may  enumerate  many  degrees  of  agnation ;  and  even  those 
who  are  bom  after  the  decease  of  their  parents,  obtain  the  rights 
of  consanguinity  :  the  law  nevertheless  does  not  grant  the  right  of 
inheritance  to  all  the  agnati,  but  to  those  only,  who  are  in  the 
nearest  degree,  when  it  becomes  certain  that  the  deceased  hath 
died  intestate. 

Of  adopted. 

II.  The  right  of  agnation  arises  also  through  adoption ;  thus, 
the  natural  and  adopted  sons  of  the  same  father  are  agnates ; 
but  such  persons  are  without  doubt  improperly  called  consan- 
guifici.  Also  if  a  brother,  a  paternal  uncle,  or  any  other,  who  is 
agnated  to  you  in  a  more  remote  degree,  should  adopt  any  person 
into  his  family,  then  such  adopted  person  is  undoubtedly  to  b* 
reckoned  in  the  number  of  your  agnati. 


128 THE  INSTITUTES  «.  in.  T.  n, 

Of  Male  and  Female.      . 

III.  Succession  among  males  proceeds  according  to  the  right  of 
agnation,  although  they  are  in  the  most  distant  degree.  But  it 
hath  pleased  the  antient  lawyers,  that  females  should  only  inherit 
by  consanguinity,  if  they  are  sisters;  and  not  in  a  more  remote 
degree ;  though  males  might  be  admitted  in  the  most  distant  de- 
gree to  inherit  females:  thus,  in  case  of  death,  the  inheritance  of 
your  brother's  daughter,  or  of  the  daughter  of  your  paternal  uncle 
or  aunt,  would  appertain  to  you  ;  but  your  inheritance  would  not 
appertain  to  them.  And  this  was  so  constituted,  because  it 
seemed  expedient  for  the  benefit  of  society,  that  inheritances 
should  for  the  most  part  fall  into  the  possession  of  males.  But, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  extremely  unjust,  that  females  should  be  thus 
almost  wholly  excluded  as  strangers,  the  praetor  admitted  them 
to  the  possession  of  goods  in  that  part  of  his  edict,  in  which  he 
gives  the  possession  of  goods  on  account  of  proximity:  yet  they 
are  only  admitted  upon  condition,  that  there  is  no  agnate,  or 
nearer  cb gnate.  But  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables  did  not  intro- 
duce these  dispositions  ;  for  that  law,  according  to  the  plainness 
and  simplicity,  which  are  agreeable  to  all  laws,  called  the  agnates 
of  either  sex,  or  any  degree,  to  succession,  in  the  same  manner 
as  it  admitted  proper  heirs.  But  the  middle  law,  which  was  pos- 
terior to  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  and  prior  to  the  imperial 
constitutions,  subtilly  introduced  the  before-mentioned  distinction, 
and  entirely  repelled  females  from  the  succession  of  agnates,  no 
other  method  of  succession  being  known,  till  the  proetors,  cor* 
reeling  by  degrees  the  asperity  of  the  civil  law,  or  supplying  what 
was  deficient,  added  in  their  edicts  a  new  order  of  succession, 
being  induced  to  it  by  a  motive  of  humanity  ;  and,  by  introducing 
the  line  of  cognation  on  account  of  proximity,  they  thus  assisted 
the  females,  and  gave  them  the  possession  of  goods,  which  is 
called  unde  cognatt.  But  we,  although  we  have  adhered  to  the 
law  of  the  twelve  tables,  and  strictly  maintained  it  in  regard  to 
females,  must  yet  commend  the  humanity  of  the  pra3tors,  though 
they  have  not  afforded  a  full  remedy  in  the  present  case.  But, 
since  the  same  natural  degree  of  relation,  and  the  same  title  of 
agnation  appertains  as  well  to  females  as  to  males,  what  reason 
can  be  assigned  that  males  should  be  permitted  to  succeed  all 
their  agnati,  and  that  no  means  of  succession  should  be  open  to 
any  female  agnate,  except  a  sister?  We  therefore,  reducing  all 
things  to  an  equality,  and  making  our  disposition  conformable  to 
the  laws  of  the  twelve  tables,  have  by  our  constitution  ordained, 
that  all  legitime  persons,  that  is,  descendants  from  males,  whether 


B.  HI.  T.  ir.  OF  JUSTINI 


AN. 


male  or  female,  shall  be  equally  called  to  the  rights  of  succession 
ab  intestato  according  to  the  prerogative  of  their  degree,  and  be 
by  no  means  excluded,  although  they  possess  not   the  rights  of 
consanguinity  in  so  near  a  degree  as  sisters. 
Of  the  Sons  of  Sisters. 

IV.  We  have  farther  thought  it  necessary  to  add  a  clause  to  our 
constitution,  by  which  one  degree  is  transferred  from  the  line  of 
cognation  to  the  Une  of  legitime  succession,  i.  e.  of  agnation:  so 
that  not  only  the  son  and  daughter  of  a  brother  (according  to  our 
former  definition  of  agnates  )  shall  be  called  to  the  succession  of 
their  paternal  uncle,  but  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  sister,  who  is 
either  by  the  same  father  or  by  the  same  mother,  may  also  be  ad- 
mitted with  agnates  to  the  succession  of  their  maternal  uncle  ;  but 
no  one  of  the  descendants  of  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  sister  is  by 
any  means  to  be  admitted.  And,  when  a  person  dies,  who  at  his 
decease  was  both  a  paternal  and  maternal  uncle,  that  is,  who  had 
nephews  or  neices  living  both  by  a  brother  and  by  a  sister,  then 
such  children  succeed  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  they  were  all  de- 
scendants from  males,  when  the  deceased  leaves  no  brother  or  sis- 
ter, and  they  take  the  inheritance  not  per  stirpes,  or  according 
to  their  respective  stocks,  but  per  capita,  i.  e.  by  poll:  but,  if 
there  are  brothers  or  sisters,  and  they  accept  the  succession,  all 
others  of  a  more  remote  degree  are  excluded. 
Of  Relations  and  Strangers. 

.  V.  When  there  are  many  degrees  of  agnates,  the  law  of  the 
twelve  tables  calls  those,  who  are  in  the  nearest  degree:  if  there- 
fore, for  example,  there  is  a  brother  of  the  deceased,  and  a  son  of 
another  brother,  or  a  paternal  uncle,  the  brother  is  preferred.  But, 
although  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables  calls  the  nearest  agnate  in  the 
singular  number,  yet  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that,  if  there  are 
many,  in  the  same  degree,  they  ought  all  to  be  admitted.  And, 
although  properly  the  nearest  degree  must  be  understood  to  denote 
the  nearest  degree  of  many,  yet,  if  there  is  but  one  degree  of  ag- 
nates, the  inheritance  must  undoubtedly  appertain  to  those,  who 
are  in  that  degree. 

Of  what  time  Relationship  is  Regarded. 

VI.  When  a  man  dies  and  leaves  no  testament,  then  that  person  is 
esteemed  his  proximate  kinsman,  who  was  the  nearest  of  kin  at  the 
decease  of  the  intestate.  But,  when  the  deceased  hath  actually 
made  a  testament,  then  that  person  is  esteemed  his  nearest  of  kin, 
who  was  so  at  the  time,  when  it  became  certain,  that  the  testamen- 
tary heir  had  declined  the  inheritance;  for,  till  then,  a  man,  who 

VOL.  1.  No.  5,  R 


130  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  n. 


hath  made  a  testament,  can  not  be  said  to  have  died  intestate  :  and 
thus  an  intestacy  does  not  sometimes  become  evident,  till  after  a 
long  time;  in  which  space,  the  proximate  kinsman  being  dead, 
it  often  happens,  that  he  becomes  the  nearest  of  kin,  who  was 
not  so  at  the  death  of  the  testator. 

Of  the  Successory  Edict. 

VII.  But  it  hath  obtained  as  law,  that  there  should  be  no  suc- 
cession among  agnates  j  so  that,  if  the  nearest  agnate  is  called  to 
an  inheritance,  and  hath  either  refused  the  heirship,  or  been  pre- 
vented  by  death  from  entering  upon  it,  his  own  legitime  heir 
would  not  be  admitted  to  succeed   him.     But  this  the  praetors 
have  in  some  measure  corrected,  and  have  not  left  the  agnates  of 
a  deceased  person  wholly  without  assistance,  but  have  ordered, 
that  they  should  be  called  to  the  inheritance  as  cognates,  because 
they  were  debarred  from  the  rights  of  agnation.     But  we,  being 
earnestly  desirous  to  render  our  law  as  perfect  and  complete  as 
possible,  have  ordained  by  our  constitution,  which,  induced  by 
humanity,   we  published   concerning    the   right  of  patronage, 
"  that   legitime    succession  should  not  be  denied  to  agnates  in 
the  inheritances  of  agnates  :"   for  it  was  sufficiently  absurd,  that 
a  right,  which  by   means   of  the  praetor  was  open  to  cognates, 
should   be  shut   up   and   denied   to  agnates:    but  it  was  more 
abundantly  absurd,  that,  in  tutelages,  the  second  degree  of  agnates 
should  succeed  upon  failure  of  the  first;  and  that  the  same  law, 
which  obtained  in  that,  which  was  onerous,  should  not  also  ob- 
tain in  that,  which  was  lucrative. 

Of  the  Legitimate  succession  of  Parents. 

VIII.  A  parent,  who  hath  emancipated  a  son  or  a  daughter,  a 
grandson  or  a  grand-daughter,  or  any  other  of  his  lineal  descend- 
ants under  a  fiduciary  contract,  is  admitted  to  their  legitime  suc- 
cession*   But  it  is  now  effected  by  our  constitution,  that  every 
emancipation  shall  for  the  future  be  always  regarded,  as  if  it  har} 
been  under  such  a  contract ;  although  among  the   antients   the 
parent  was  never  called  to  the  legitime  succession  of  his  children, 
unless   he   had   actually   emancipated   them  under  a  fiduciary 
contract. 


TITLE  III. 

OF   THE  TERTYLLIAN  SENATUS-CONSULTUM. 
Of  the  Law  of  the  Twehe  Tables  and  the  Praetorian  Right. 
SUCH  was  the  rigour  of  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  that  it 
preferred  the  issue  by  males,  and  excluded  those,  who  were  related 


B.  in.  T.  in.  OF  JUSTINIAN.    ~  131 

by  the  female  line,  so  that  the  right  of  succession  was  not  per- 
mitted to  take  place  reciprocally  between  a  mother  and  her  son, 
or  a  mother  and  her  daughter.  But  the  praetors,  on  account  of 
the  proximity  of  cognation,  admitted  those,  who  were  related  by 
the  female  line  to  the  succession,  giving  them  the  possession  of 
goods,  called  unde  cognati. 

Of  the  Constitution  of  Claudius. 

I.  But  these  narrow  limits  of  the  law  were  afterwards  enlarged 
by  the  emperor  Claudius,  who  first  gave  the  legitime  inheritance 
of  deceased  children  to  their  mothers,  in  assuasion  of  their  grief 
for  so  great  a  loss. 

Of  the  Tertyllian  Senat  us- Consul  turn.     Of  the  Eight  of  Children. 

II.  But  afterwards  by  the  Tertyllian  senatus-consultum,  made 
in  the  reign  of  Adrian,  the  emperor,  the  fullest  care  was  taken, 
that  the   succession    of  children    should  pass  to   their  mother, 
though  not  to  their  grand-mother:  so  that  a  mother,, who  is  born 
of  free  parents,  and  has  the  right  of  three   children,  and  also  a 
libertine  or  freed-woman,  who  has  the  right  of  four  children,  may 
be  admitted,  although  they  are   under  the  power  of  a  parent,  to 
the  goods  of  their  sons  or  daughters,  dying  intestate.     But,  when 
a  mother  is  under  power,  it  is  required,  that  she  should  not  enter 
upon  the  inheritance  of  her  children,  but   at  the  command  of 
him,  to  whom  she  is  subject. 

Who  are  preferred  to  the  Mother. 

III.  But,  when  a  deceased  son  leaves  children,  who  are  proper 
heirs,  or  in  the  place  of  proper  heirs,  either  in  the  first  or  an  in- 
ferior degree,  they  are  preferred  to  the  mother  of  such  deceased 
son.     And  the  son,  or  daughter,  of  a  deceased  daughter  is  also 
preferred   by  the   constitutions  to  the  mother  of  the  deceased 
daughter ;  i.  e.  to  their  grand-mother.     Also  the  father  of  a  son, 
or  daughter,   is  preferred  to  the  mother ;   but  a  grand-father  or 
great-grand-father  is  not  preferred  to  the  mother,  when  the  inheri- 
tance is  contended  for  by  these  only  without  the  father.     Also 
the  consanguine  brother  either  of  a  son  or  a  daughter  excluded 
the  mother;  but  a  consanguine  sister  was  admitted  equally  with 
her  mother.     But,  if  there  had  been  both  a  brother  and  a  sister  of 
the  same  blood  with  the  deceased,  the  brother  of  the  deceased 
excluded  his  mother,  although   she   was   honoured  with  the  pri- 
vilege of  those,  who  have  children  :  But  the  inheritance,  in  this 
case,  was  always  divided   in  equal  parts   between  brothers  and 
sisters. 


132  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  in. 

A  New  Constitution. 

IV.  But  by  a  constitution,  which  we  have  inserted  in  the  code, 
and  honoured  with  our  name,    we    have   thought  proper,  that 
mothers  should  be  favoured  in  regard  to  the  law  of  nature,  on 
account  of  their  pains  in  child-bearing,   their  great  danger,  and 
death  itself,  which  they  often  suffer;  we  therefore  have  esteemed 
it  to  be  highly  unjust,  that  the  law  should  make  that  detrimental, 
which  is  in  its  nature  merely  fortuitous ;  for,  if  a  married  woman, 
who  is  free-born,  does  not  bring  forth  three  children,  or  if  a  freed- 
woman  does  not  become  the  mother  of  four  children,   can  Such 
persons,  for  that  reason  only,  be  with  justice  deprived  of  the  suc- 
cession of  their  children  ?  for  how  can  a  failure  of  this  nature 
be  imputed  to  them  as  a  crime  ?  We  therefore,  not  regarding  any 
fixed  number  of  children,  have  given  a  full  right  to  every  mother, 
whether  ingenuous  or   a  freed-woman,   of  being   called   to  the 
legitime  succession  of  her  child  or  children  deceased,  whether 
male  or  female. 

The  Preference  of  the  Mother. 

V.  But,  in  examining  the  constitutions  of  former  emperors,  re- 
lating to  the  right  of  succession,  we  observed,  that  these  con- 
stitutions were  partly  favourable  to  mothers  and  partly  grievous ; 
not  always  calling  them  to  the  entire  inheritance  of  their  children, 
but  in  some  cases  depriving  them  of  a  third,  which  was  given 
to  certain  legitime  persons;  and  in  other  cases,   doing  the  con- 
trary ;   i.  e.  allowing  a  mother  a  third  only.     It  hath    therefore 
seemed  right  to  us,  that  mothers  should  receive  the  succession  of 
their  children  without   any  diminution,  and  that  they  should  be 
exclusively  preferred  before  all  legitime  persons,  except  the  bro- 
thers and  sisters  of  the  deceased,  whether  they  are  consanguine, 
or  only  cognate :  But,  as  we   have  preferred  the  mother  to  all 
other  legitime  persons,   we  are  willing  to  call  all  brothers   and 
sisters,  legitime  or  otherwise,  to  the  inheritance  together  with 
the  mother:  yet  in  such  manner,  that,  if  only  the  sisters,  agnate 
or  cognate,  and  the  mother  of  the  deceased  survive,  the  mother 
shall  have  one  half  of  the  effects,  and  the  sisters  the  other.     But, 
if  a  mother  survives,  and  also  a  brother  or  brothers,  or  brothers 
and  sisters,  whether  legitime  or  cognate,  then  the  inheritance  of 
the  intestate  son  or  daughter  must  be  distributed  in  capita;  i.  e. 
must  be  divided  into  equal  shares. 

Of  the   Tutor. 

VI.  As  we  have  taken  a  particular  care  of  the  interest  of 
mothers,  it  behoves  them  in  return  to  consult  the  welfare  of  their 
children.  Be  it  known  therefore,  that,  if  a  mother  shall  neglect, 


B.  in.  T.  iii,  OF  JUSTINIAN.  133 

during  the  space  of  a  whole  year,  to  demand  a  tutor  for  her  child- 
ren, or  shall  neglect  to  require  a  new  tutor  in  the  place  of  a 
former,  who  hath  either  been  removed  or  excused,  she  will  be 
deservedly  repelled  from  the  succession  of  such  children,  if  they 
die  within  puberty. 

Of  the  Tertyllian  Senatus-Consultum. 

VII.  Although  a  son  or  a  daughter  is  of  spurious  birth,  yet  the 
mother,  by  the  Tertyllian  senatus-consultum,  may  be  admitted 
to  succeed  to  the  goods  of  either. 


TITLE  IV. 
OF   THE  ORFICIAN  SENATUS-CONSULTUUJT. 

Origin  and  Sum  of  the  Senatus-Consultum. 
ON  the  contrary  children  are  reciprocally  admitted  to  the 
goods  of  their  intestate  mothers,  by  the  Orfician  senatus-consul- 
tum, which  was  enacted  in  the  consulate  of  Orficius  and  Rufus, 
in  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Marcus  Antoninus ;  and,  by  this 
decree,  the  legitime  inheritance  is  given  both  to  sons  and  daugh- 
ters, although  they  are  under  power;  and  they  are  also  preferred 
to  the  consanguine  brothers,  and  to  the  agnates,  of  their  de- 
ceased  mother. 

Of  the  Grandson  and  Grand-daughter. 

I.  But,  since  grandsons  and  grand-daughters  were  not  called  by 
the  senatus-consultum  to  the  legitime  succession  of  their  grand- 
mother, the  omission  was  afterwards  supplied,   by  the  imperial 
constitutions:  so  that  grandsons  and  grand-daughters  were  called 
to  inherit,  as  well  as  sons  and  daughters. 

r\f  *i          /r     A       /•  T\  «•!•>••»-*••£.  3;' 

Of  the  effect  of  Diminution. 

II.  But  it  must  be  observed,  that  those  successions,  which  prfc- 
ceed  from  the    Tertyllian  and  Orfician  senatus-consulta,  are  not 
extinguished  by  diminution.    For  it  is  an  established  rule,  that 
new  legitime  inheritances  are  not  destroyed  by  diminution  ;  but 
that  it  affects  only  those  inheritances, "which   proceed  from  tbe 

law  of  the  twelve  tables. 

• 

Of  Spurious  Children. 

III.  It  is  lastly  to  be  noted,  that  even  illegitimate  children  are 
admitted  by  the  Orfician  senatus-consultum  to   the  inheritance  of 
their  mother. 

Of  the  Right  of  Accretion. 

IV.  When  there  are  many  legitime  heirs,  and  some  renounce, 
the  inheritance,  or  are  hindered  from  entering  upon  it  by  death, 


134   THE  INSTITUTES B.  in.  T.  v. 

or  any  other  cause,  then  the  shares  or  portions  of  such  persons 
fall  by  the  right  of  accretion  to  those,  who  have  accepted  the 
inheritance:  and,  although  the  acceptors  happen  to  die  even 
before  the  refusal  or  the  failure  of  their  coheirs,  yet  the  portions 
of  such  coheirs,  will  appertain  to  the  heirs  of  the  acceptors  of 
the  inheritance. 


TITLE  V. 
OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF  COGNATES. 

Third  Order  of  Heritors. 

AFTER  the  proper  heirs  and  those,  whom  the  praetor  and  the 
constitution  call  to  inherit  with  the  proper  heirs,  and  after  the 
legitime  heirs  (among  whom  are  the  agnati,  and  those,  whom  the 
above  mentioned  senatus-consulta  and  our  constitution  have  num- 
bered with  the  agnati)  the  pnetor  calls  the  nearest  cognates^ 
observing  the  proximity  of  relation. 

Of  Agnates  who  have  suffered  Diminution.^  ^$4. 

I.  By  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  neither  the  agnates,  who 
have  suffered  diminution,  nor  their  issue,  are  esteemed  legitime 
lieirs ;  but  they  are  called   by  the  praetor  in  the  third  order  of 
succession  :  we  must  nevertheless  except   a  brother  and  sister, 
although  they  are  emancipated,  but  not   their  children;  for  the 
constitution  of  Anastasius  calls  an  emancipated  brother  or  sister 
to  the  succession  of  a  brother  or  sister,  together  with  those,  who 
have  not  been  emancipated,  and  are  therefore  integri  juris ;  but 
it  does  not  call  them  to  an  equal  share  of  the  succession,  as  may 
easily  be  collected  from  the  very  words  of  the  constitution.     But 
this  constitution  prefers  an  emancipated  brother  or  sister  to  other 
agnates  of  an  inferior  degree,  although  unemancipated ;  and  con- 
sequently to  all  cognates  in  general. 

Of  those  who  are  connected  by  Women. 

II.  Those  also,  who  are  collaterally  related  by  the  female  line, 
are  called  by  the  pnetor  in  the  third  order  of  succession,  accord- 
ing to  their  proximity. 

Of  Children  given  in  Adoption. 

III.  Children,  who  are   in   an   adoptive  family,  are  likewise 
called  in  the  third  order  of  succession  to  the  inheritance  of  their 
natural  parents. 

Of  Spurious  Children. 

IV.  It  is  manifest,  that  base  born  children  have  no  agnates  ; 
inasmuch  as   agnation  proceeds  from  the  father,  cognation  from 
the  mother ;  and  such  children  are   looked  upon  as  having  no 


B.  in.  T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  135 

father.  And,  for  the  same  reason,  consanguinity  cannot  be  said 
to  subsist  between  the  bastard  children  of  the  same  woman  ;  be- 
cause consanguinity  is  a  species  of  agnation.  They  can  there- 
fore only  be  allied  to  each  other  as  they  are  related  to  their  mother, 
that  is,  by  cognation  ;  and  it  is  for  this  reason,  that  all  such  child- 
ren are  called  to  the  possession  of  goods  by  that  part  of  the 
praetorian  edict,  by  which  cognates  are  called  by  the  right  of 
their  proximity. 

Of  Agnates  and  Cognates. 

V.  In  this  place  it  will  be  necessary  to  observe,  that  any  person 
may,  by  the  right  of  agnation  be  admitted  to  inherit,  although  he 
is  in  the  tenth  degree  ;  and  this  is  allowed  both  by  the  law  of 
the  twelve  tables,  and  the  edict,  by  which  the  praetor  promises, 
that  he  will  give  ,the  possession  of  goods  to  the  legitime  heirs. 
But  the  praetor  promises  the  possession  of  goods  to  cognates,  only 
as  far  as  the  sixth  degree  of  cognation,  according  to  their  right  of 
proximity ;  and  in  the  seventh  degree,  to  those  cognates  only, 
who  are  the  descendants  of  a  cousin  german. 

TITLE  VI. 
OF  THE  DEGREES  OF  COGNATION. 

Division  of  Cognation 

IT  is  necessary  in  this  place  to  shew  how  the  degrees  of  cogna- 
tion are  to  be  computed  :  and  first  we  must  observe,  that  there  is 
one  species  of  cognation,  which  relates  to  ascendants,  another  to 
descendants,  and  a  third  to  collaterals.  The  first  and  superior 
cognation  is  that  relation,  which  a  man  bears  to  his  parents — the 
second,  or  inferior,  is  that,  which  he  bears  to  his  children — and 
the  third  is  that  relation,  which  he  bears  to  his  brothers  and  sis- 
ters, and  their  issue  ;  and  also  to  his  uncles  and  aunts,  whether 
paternal  or  maternal.  The  superior  and  inferior  cognation  com- 
mence at  the  first  degree  ;  but  the  transverse  or  collateral  cogna- 
tion commences  at  the  second. 

Of  the  first,  second,  and  third  Degree. 

I.  A  father,  or  a  mother,  is  in  the  first  degree  in  the  right  line 
ascending:  and  a  son,  or  a  daughter,  is  also  in  the  first  degree  in 
the  right  line  descending.  A  grand-father,  or  a  grand-mother,  is 
in  the  second  degree  in  the  right  line  ascending:  and  a  grandson, 
or  grand-daughter,  is  in  the  second  degree  in  the  right  line 
descending:  and  a  brother,  or  a  sister,  is  also  in  the  second  de- 
gree in  the  collateral  line.  A  great  grand-father,  or  a  great  grand- 
mother, is  in  the  third  degree  in  the  right  line  ascending  ;  and  a 


136  THE  INSTITUTES      ____  B,  ru.  T.  vi. 

great-grandson,  or  great-grand-daughter,  is  in  the  third  degree  in 
the  right  line  descending:  and  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  brother  or 
sister  is  also  in  the  third  degree  in  the  collateral  line;  and  by  a 
parity  of  reasoning  an  uncle,  or  an  aunt,  whether  paternal  or 
maternal,  is  also  in  the  third  degree.  A  paternal  uncle,  called 
patntus,.  is  a  father's  brother;—  a  maternal  uncle,  called  avunculus, 
is  a  mother's  brother  ;—  a  paternal  aunt,  called  amita,  is  a  father's 
sister;—  and  a  maternal  aunt,  called  matertera,  is  a  mother's  sis- 


ter.   And  each  of  these  persons  is  called  in  Greek  Saoc  or 
promiscuously. 

Fourth  Degree. 

II.  A  great-great-grand-father,  or  a  great-great-grand-mother, 
is  in  the  fourth  degree  in   the  right  line  ascending;  and  a  great- 
great-grandson,  or  a  great-great-grand-daughter,   is  in  the  fourth 
degree  in  the  right  line  descending.     Also,   in  the  transverse  or 
collateral  line,  the  grandson,  or  the  grand-daughter,  of  a  brothel* 
or  a  sister,  is  in  the  fourth   degree  ;  and  consequently  a  great 
uncle,  or  great  aunt,  paternal  or  maternal,  is  in  the  fourth  de- 
gree :  and  also  cousins  german,  who  are  called  consobnni.     But 
some  have  been  rightly  of  opinion,  that  the  children  of  sisters  are 
only  .properly  called  consobrini,  quasi   consororini',  -  that  the 
children   of  brothers  are  properly  called  fratres  patrueles,   or 
brothers  patruel,  if  males;  and  sprores  patruelcs,  or  sisters  patruel, 
if  females  ;  -  and  that,  when  there  are  children  of  a  brother,  and 
children  of  a  sister,  they  are  properly  called  amitini  ;  but  the  sons 
of  your  aunt  by  the  father's  side  call  you  consobrimts,   and  you 
call  them  amitini. 

Fifth  Degree. 

III.  A   great-grand-father's   grand-father,   or   a   great-grand- 
father's grand-mother,  is  in  the  fifth  degree  in  the  line  ascending, 
and  a  great-grandson,  or  a  great-grand-daughter,  of  a  grandson  or 
grand-daughter,  is  in  the  fifth  degree  in  the  line  descending.  And, 
in  the  transverse  or  collateral  line,  a  great-grandson,  or  great- 
grand-daughter,  of  a  brother  or  sister,  is  also  in  the  fifth  degree  : 
and  consequently  a  great-grand-father's  brother  or  sister,  or  a 
great-grand-mother's  brother  or  sister,  is  in  the  fifth  degree.  The 
son  or  daughter  also  of  a  cousin  german  is  in  the  fifth  degree  ;  and 
so  is  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  great  uncle  or  great  aunt,  paternal 
or  maternal  ;  and   such  son,  or  daughter,  is  called  propior  so- 
brino  and  propior  sobrina. 

Sixth  Degree. 

IV.  A   great-grand-father's   great-grand-father,    or   a    great- 
grand-father's  great-grand-mother,  is  in  the  sixth  degree  in  the 


*.  in.  T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  137 


line  ascending  ;  and  the  great-grandson,  or  great-grand-daughter 
of  a  great  grand-son,  or  a  great-grand-daughter,  is  likewise  in  the 
sixth  degree  in  the  line  descending.  And,  in  the  transverse  or 
collateral  line,  a  great-great-grandson,  or  a  great-great-grand- 
daughter, of  a  brother  or  sister,  is  also  in  the  sixth  degree:  and 
consequently  a  great-great-grand-father's  brother  or  sister,  and  a 
great-great-grand-mother's  brother  or  sister,  is  in  the  sixth  de- 
gree. And  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  great-great-uncle,  or  great- 
great-aunt,  paternal  or  maternal,  is  also  in  the  sixth  degree  ;  and 
so  also  is  the  son  or  daughter  of  the  son  or  daughter  of  a  great- 
uncle  or  great-aunt,  paternal  or  maternal.  The  grandson  also,  or 
the  grand-daughter,  of  a  cousin  german,  is  in  the  sixth  degree  ; 
and,  in  the  same  degrees  between  themselves,  we  reckon  the 
sobrini  and  the  sobrince  ;  that  is,  the  sons  and  daughters  of  cousins 
german  in  general,  whether  such  cousins  german  are  so  related 
by  two  brothers,  or  by  two  sisters,  or  by  a  brother  and  a  sister. 
Of  the  other  Degrees. 

V.  It  is  sufficient  to  have  shewn  thus  far,  how  the  degrees  of 
cognation  are  enumerated :  and,  from  the  examples  given,  it  is 
evident  in  what  manner  we  ought  to  compute  the  more  remote 
degrees;  for  every  person  generated  always  adds  one  degree;  so 
that  it  is  much  easier  to  determine,  'in  what  degree  any  person 
is  related  to  another,  than  to  denote  such  person  by  a  proper  term 
of  cognation. 

Of  the  Degrees  of  Agnation. 

VI.  The  degrees  of  agnation  are  enumerated  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  the  degrees  of  cognation. 

TITLE  VII. 
OF  SERVILE  COGNATION. 

IT  is  certain,  that  the  part  of  the  edict,  in  which  the  possession 
of  goods  is  promised,  according  to  the  rights  of  proximity,  does 
not  relate  to  servile  cognation  ;  neither  hath  such  cognation  been 
regarded  by  any  antient  law.  But,  by  our  own  constitution,  con- 
cerning the  rights  of  patronage,  which  right  was  heretofore  ob- 
scure, and  every  way  confused,  we  have  ordained  (humanity  so 
suggesting)  that,  if  a  slave  shall  have  a  child,  or  children,  either 
by  a  free-woman  or  by  a  bond-woman,  with  whom  he  lives  in 
contubernio,  and,  on  the  contrary,  that  if  a  bond-woman  shall  have 
a  child,  or  children,  of  either  sex,  by  a  freeman,  or  by  a  slave, 
with  whom  she  lives  in  contiibcrnio,  and  such  father  and  mother 
are  afterwards  infranchised,  the  children  shall  succeed  to  their, 

VOL.  1,  No.  5.  S 


138      THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  viu 

father  or  mother,  no  regard  being  paid  to  the  right  of  patronage. 
And  we  have  not  only  called  these  children  to  the  succession  of 
their  parents,  but  also  to  succeed  each  other  mutually,  whether 
they  are  sole  in  succession,  having  all  been  born  in  servitude  and 
afterwards  manumitted,  or  whether  they  succeed  with  others, 
who  were  conceived  after  the  infranchisement  of  their  parents, 
and  whether  they  are  all  by  the  same  father'  and  mother,  or  by  a 
different  father,  or  a  different  mother.  And,  in  brief,  we  have 
been  willing,  that  children  born  in  slavery,  and  afterwards  manu- 
mitted, should  succeed  in  the  same  manner  as  those  who  are  the 
issue  of  parents  legally  married. 

Collation  of  Orders  and  Degrees. 

I.  By  what  we  have  already  said,  it  appears,  that  those,  who 
are  in  an  equal  degree  of  cognation^  are  not  always  called 
equally  to  the  succession ;  and  farther,  that  even  he  who  is  the 
nearest  of  kin,  is  not  constantly  to  be  preferred.  For,  inasmuch 
as  the  first  place  is  given  improper  heirs,  and  to  those  who  are 
numbered  with  proper  heirs,  it  is  apparent,  that  the  great-grand- 
son, or  great-great-grandson,  is  preferred  to  the  brother,  or  even 
the  father  or  mother  of  the  deceased :  although  a  father  or  mother, 
(as  we  have  before  observed,)  obtain  the  first  degree  of  relation, 
a  brother  the  second,  a  great-grandson  the  third,  and  a  great- 
great-grandson  the  fourth :  neither  does  it  make  any  difference, 
whether  such  grand-children  were  under  the  power  of  the  de- 
ceased at  the  time  of  his  death,  or  out  of  his  power ;  either  by 
being  emancipated,  or  by  being  the  children  of  those  who  were 
emancipated  .-  neither  can  it  be  objected,  that  they  are  descended 
by  the  female  line.  But,  when  there  are  no  proper  heirs,  nor  any 
of  those  who  are  permitted  to  rank  with  them,  then  an  agnate, 
who  hath  the  full  right  of  agnation  in  him,  although  he  is  in  the 
most  distant  degree,  is  generally  preferred  to  a  cognate,  who  is  in 
the  nearest  degree;  thus  the  grandson,  or  great-grandson  of  a  pa- 
ternal uncle  is  preferred  to  an  uncle  or  aunt,  who  is  maternal.  We 
therefore  observe,  that,  when  there  are  no  proper  heirs,  nor  any 
who  are  numbered  with  them,  nor  any  who  ought  to  be  preferred 
by  the  right  of  agnation,  (as  we  have  before  noted,)  then  he  who 
is  in  the  nearest  degree  of  cognation,  is  called  to  the  succession ; 
and  that,  if  there  are  many  in  the  same  degree,  they  are  all  cabled 
equally.  But  a  brother  and  sister,  although  emancipated,  are  yet 
called  to  the  succession  of  brothers  and  sisters ;  for,  although 
they  have  suffered  diminution,  they  are  nevertheless  preferred  to 
all  agnates  of  a  more  remote  degree. 


B.  in.  T.  vin.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  139 

TITLE  VIII. 
OF  THE  SUCCESSION  OF  FREED-MEN. 

Of  the  Law  of  the  Twelve  Tables. 

LET  us  now  treat  of  the  succession  of  freed-men.  A  freed- 
man  had  it  formerly  in  his  power,  without  being  subject  to  any 
penalty,  wholly  to  omit  in  his  testament  any  mention  of  his  patron ; 
for  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables  called  the  patron  to  the  inherit- 
ance, only  when  the  freed-man  died  intestate,  and  without  proper 
heirs;  and  therefore,  though  a  freed-man  had  died  intestate,  yet, 
if  he  had  left  a  proper  heir,  the  patron  would  have  received  no 
benefit:  and,  indeed,  when  the  natural  and  legitimate  children  of 
the  deceased  became  his  heirs,  there  seemed  no  cause  of  com- 
plaint; but,  when  the  freedman  left  only  an  adopted  son,  it  was 
manifestly  injurious  that  the  patron  should  have  no  claim. 
Of  the  Prcetorian  Edict. 

I.  The  law  was  therefore  afterwards  amended  by  the  edict  of 
the  praetor:  for  every  freedman,  who  made  his  testament,  was 
commanded  so  to  dispose  of  his  effects,  as  to  leave  a  moity  to  his 
patron :  and,  if  the  testator  left  nothing,  or  less  than  a  moity, 
then  the  possession  of  half  was  given  to  the  patron  contra  tabular, 
i.  e.  contrary  to  the  disposition  of  the  testament.     And,  if  a  freed- 
man died  intestate,  leaving  an  adopted  son  his  heir,  the  possession 
of  a  moity  of  the  effects  was  in  this  case  also  given  to  the  patron, 
notwithstanding  such  heir:   yet  not  only  the  natural  and  lawful 
children  of  a  freed-man,  whom  he  had  under  his  power  at  the 
time  of  his  death,  excluded  the  patron,  but  those  children  also, 
who  were  emancipated,  and  given  in  adoption,  if  they  were  written 
heirs  for  any  part,  or  even,  although  they  were  omitted,  if  they 
had  requested  the  possession  CONTRA  TABULAS,  by  virtue  of  the 
praetorian  edict.    But  disinherited  children  by  no  means  repelled 
the  patron. 

Of  the  P apian  Law. 

II.  But  afterwards  the  rights  of  those  patrons,  who  had  wealthy 
freed-men,  were  enlarged  by  the  Papian  law  ;  by  which  it  is  pro- 
vided, that  an  equal  share  shall  be  due  to  the  patron  out  of  the 
effects  of  his  freed-man,  whether  dying  testate  or  intestate,  who 
hath  left  a  patrimony  of  an  hundred  thousand  sestertii  and  fewer 
than  three  children  :  so  that,  when  a  freed-man  hath  left  only  owe 
son  or  daughter,  then  a  moity  of  the  effects  is  due  to  the  patron, 
as  if  the  deceased  had  died  testate,  without  either  son  or  daughter. 
But,  when  there  are  two  heirs,  male  or  female,  a  third  part  only 
is  due  to  the  patron;  and  when   there  are  three,  the  patron  is 
wholly  excluded. 


14o     THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  VIIT, 

Of  the  Constitution  of  Justinian. 

III.  But  by  our  imperial  constitution^  (which  we  have  caused 
to  be  promulged  in  the  Greek  language,  for  the  benefit  of  all 
nations),  we  have  ordained,  that,  if  a  freed-man,  or  freed-woman, 
dies  possessed  of  less  than  an  hundred  aurei,  (for  thus  have  we 
interpreted  the  sum  mentioned  in  the  Papian  law,  counting  one 
aureus  for  a  thousand  sestertii  J  the  patron  shall  not  be  entitled  to 
any  share  in  the  succession,  where  there  is  a  will.  But,  if  either 
a  freed-man,  or  freed-woman,  dies  intestate,  and  without  chil- 
dren, we  have  in  this  case  reserved  the  right  of  patronage  entire, 
as  it  formerly  was,  according  to  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables. 
But,  if  a  freed  person  dies  worth  more  than  an  hundred  aurei, 
and  leaves  one  child,  or  many,  of  either  sex  or  any  degree,  as  the 
heirs  and  possessors  of  his  goods,  we  have  permitted,  that  such 
child  or  children  shall  succeed  their  parent,  to  the  intire  exclusion 
of  the  patron  and  his  heirs :  and,  if  any  freed  persons  die  without 
children  and  intestate,  we  have  called  their  patrons  or  patronesses 
to  their  whole  inheritances.  And  if  any  freed  person,  worth  more 
than  an  hundred  aurei,  hath  made  a  testament,  omitted  his  patron, 
and  left  no  children,  or  hath  disinherited  them ;  or  if  a  mother, 
or  maternal  grand-father,  being  freed  persons,  have  omitted  to 
mention  their  children  in  their  wills,  so  that  such  wills  cannot 
be  proved  to  be  inofficious,  then,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution, 
the  patron  shall  succeed,  not  to  a  moity  as  formerly,  but  to  the 
third  part  of  the  estate  of  the  deceased,  by  the  possession  of  the 
goods,  called  contra  tabulas :  and,  when  freed  persons,  men  or 
women,  leave  less  than  the  third  part  of  their  effects  to  their 
patrons,  our  constitution  ordains,  that  the  deficiency  shall  be 
supplied;  and  that  this  third  part,  due  to  patrons,  shall  not  be 
subject  to  the  burden  of  trusts ,  or  legacies,  even  for  the  benefit 
of  the  children  of  the  deceased  :  for  the  co-heirs  only  of  the  patron 
shall  be  loaded  with  this  burden.  In  the  before-mentioned  con- 
stitution, we  have  collected  many  more  cases,  which  we  have 
thought  necessary  in  relation  to  the  right  of  patronage,  that 
patrons  and  patronesses,  their  children  and  collateral  relations,  as 
far  as  the  fifth  degree,  might  be  called  to  the  succession  of  their 
freed-men  and  freed-women ;  as  will  appear  more  fully  from  our 
ordinance  itself.  And,  if  there  are  many  children  of  one  patron 
or  patroness,  or  of  two  or  more  patrons  or  patronesses,  he,  who 
is  nearest  in  degree,  is  called  to  the  succession  of  his  freed-man  or 
freed-wornan ;  and,  when  there  are  many  in  equal  degree,  the 
estate  must  be  divided  in  capita,  and  not  in  stirpes\  and  the  same 
order  is  decreed  to  be  observed  among  the  collaterals  of  patrons 


k.  in.  T.  ix » OF  JUSTINIAN.  141 

and  patronesses :   for  we  have  rendered  the  laws  of  succession 
almost  the  same  in  regard  to  the  ingenui  and  libertini. 

Who  succeed  to  Freed-men. 

IV.  But  what  we  have  said  relates  to  the  libertini  of  the  present 
time,  who  are  all  citizens  of  Rome;  fof  there  is  HOW  no  other 
species  of  freed-men;  that  of  the  Dedltitii  and  Latini  being 
abolished  :  the  latter  of  whom  never  enjoyed  any  right  of  succes- 
sion ;  for  although  they  led  the  lives  of  freed-men,  yet,  with  their 
last  breath,  they  lost  both  their  lives  and  liberties  :  for  their  pos- 
sessions, like  the  goods  of  slaves,  were  detained  by  their  manu- 
mittor,  who  possessed  them,  as  a  peculium,  by  virtue  of  the  law 
Junta  Norland.  It  was  afterwards  provided  by  the  senatus-con- 
sultuin  Largianum,  that  the  children  of  a  manumittor,  who  were 
not  nominally  disinherited,  sbould  be  preferred  to  any  strangers, 
whom  a  manumittor  might  constitute  his  heirs;  then  followed 
the  edict  of  Trajan,  which  ordained,  that,  if  a  slave  either  against 
the  will,  or  without  the  knowledge  of  his  patron,  should  obtain 
the  freedom  of  Rome  by  the  favour  of  the  emperor,  such  slave 
shall  continue  free,  whilst  living,  but,  at  his  death,  should  be  re- 
garded only  as  a  Latin.  But  we,  being  averse  to  these  changes  of 
condition,  and  dissatisfied  with  the  difficulties  attending  them, 
have  thought  proper,  by  virtue  of  our  constitution,  for  ever  to 
abolish,  together  witb  the  Latins,  the  law  Junia,  the  senatus-con- 
sultum  Largianum,  and  the  edict  of  Trajan  ;  to  the  intent,  that 
all  freed-men  may  become  freed-men  of  Rome.  And  we  have 
happily  contrived  by  some  additions,  that  the  manner  of  confer- 
ring the  freedom  of  Latins  should  now  become  the  manner  of  con- 
ferring the  freedom  of  Rome. 

tetfotsijtt  ^.tt^'.'Jnuf?  *yrf^.,s»nr?is*.3  •  r^J^'-j ?..-•£•• 
_ 

TITLE  IX. 

OF  THE  ASSIGNMENT  OF  FKEED-MEN. 
IN  regard  to  tbe  possession  of  freed-men  it  must  be  remembered, 
that  the  senate  hath  decreed,  that,  although  the  goods  of  freed- 
men  belong  equally  to  all  the  children  of  the  patron,  who  are  in 
the  same  degree,  yet  it  is  lawful  for  a  parent  to  assign  a  freed-man 
to  any  one  of  his  children,  so  that,  after  the  death  of  the  parent, 
the  child,  to  whom  the  freed-man  was  assigned,  is  solely  to  bees- 
teemed  his  patron:  and  the  other  children,  who  would  have  been 
equally  admitted  to  a  dividend  of  the  goods  of  the  freed-man, 
had  he  not  been  assigned,  are  wholly  excluded ;  but,  if  the  as- 
signee happens  to  die  without  issue,  the  excluded  children  re- 
gain their  former  right. 


14-2  THE  INSTITUTES B.  in.  T.  x. 

Of  the  Sex  of  the  Assigned. 

I.  Every  freed-person  is  assignable,  whether  manor  woman; 
and  an  assignment  may  be  made  not  only  to  a   son  or  grandson, 
but  to  a  daughter  or  grand-daughter. 

Of  Children. 

II.  The  power  of  assigning  freed-persons  is  given  to  him,  who 
bath  two  or  more  children  unemancipated,  so  that  a  father  may 
assign  a  freed-man  or  freed-woman  to  those  children,  whom  he 
retains  under  his  power :  and  hence  it  became  a  question,  if  a 
father  should  assign  a  freed-man  to  his  son  and  afterwards  eman- 
cipate that  son,  whether  the  assignment  would,  or  would  not  be 
null  ?  and  the  decision  hath  been  in  the  affirmative  ;  which  hath 
been  approved  of  by  Julian  and  many  others. 

How  this  Assignment  is  to  be  made. 

III.  But  it   makes  no  difference,  whether  the  assignment  of  a 
freed-man  is  made  by  testament,  or  not  by  testament;  for  patrons 
may  assign  even  by  word  of  mouth  ;  which  was  permitted  by  the 
senatus-consultumtma.(\e  in  the  reign  ofClaudian  in  the  consulate 
of  SabelliusRufus  and  Asterius  Scapula. 


TITLE  X. 

OF  THE  POSSESSION  OF  GOODS. 

THE  right  of  succeeding  by  the  possession  of  goods  was  in- 
troduced by  the  praetor,  in  amendment  of  the  ancient  law ;  which 
he  corrected,  not  only  in  regard  to  the  inheritances  of  intestates, 
(as  we  have  before  observed ;)  but  in  regard  also  to  the  inheri- 
tances of  those,  who  die  testate:  for,  if  a  posthumous  stranger 
was  instituted  an  heir,  although  he  could  not  enter  upon  the 
inheritance  by  the  civil  law,  inasmuch  as  his  institution  as  heir 
would  not  be  valid,  yet  by  the  praetorian  or  honorary  law  he  might 
be  made  the  possessor  of  the  goods,  when  he  had  received  the 
assistance  of  the  prcetor.  But  such  stranger  may  at  this  time,  by 
virtue  of  our  constitution,  be  legally  instituted  an  heir,  being  no 
longer  regarded  as  a  person  unknown  to  the  civil  law.  But  the 
praetor  sometimes  bestows  the  possession  of  goods,  intending 
neither  to  amend  nor  impugn  the  old  law,  but  only  to  confirm  it ; 
for  he  gives  the  possession  of  goods  secundum  tabulas  to  those, 
who  are  appointed  the  heirs  of  the  deceased  by  a  regular  testa- 
ment. He  also  calls  proper  heirs  and  agnates  to  the  possession  of 
the  goods  of  intestates  ;  and  yet  the  inheritance  would  be  their 
own  by  the  civil  laic,  although  the  pnetor  did  not  interpose  his 
authority.  But  those,  whom  the  praetor  calls  to  an  inheritance 


B.  in.  T.  x.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  143 

merely  by  virtue  of  his  office,  do  not  become  legal  heirs;  inasmuch 
as  the  praetor  cannot  make  an  heir;  for  heirs  are  made  only  by- 
law, or  by  what  has  the  effect  of  a  law,  as  a  decree  of  the  senate, 
or  an  imperial  constitution.  .But,  when  the  praetor  gives  any  per- 
sons the  possession  of  goods,  they  stand  in  the  place  of  heirs,  and 
are  called  the  possessors  of  the  goods.  But  the  praetor  hath  also 
devised  many  other  orders  of  persons,  to  whom  the  possession  of 
goods  can  be  granted,  to  the  intent,  that  no  man  may  die  without 
a  successor:  and,  by  the  rules  of  justice  and  equity,  he  hatU 
greatly  enlarged  the  right  of  taking  inheritances,  which  was 
bounded  within  the  most  narrow  limits  by  the  laws  of  the 
twelve  tables. 

Praetorian  Possessions. 

I.  The  kinds  or  species  of  the  possessions  of  goods  or  praetorian 
successions,  when  there  is  a  testament,  are  the  following.     The 
first  is  that  possession,  which  is  given  to  children,  of  whom  no 
mention  is  made  in  the  testament ;  and  this  is  called posscssio  con- 
tra tabulas  ;   i.  e.  a  possession  contrary  to  the  testament.     The 
second  is  that  which  the  praetor  promises  to  all  written  heirs,  and 
it  is   therefore  called  secundum  tabulas ;   i.  e.  a  possession  ac- 
cording to  the  testament.     These  being  fixed,  the  praetor  pro- 
ceeded to  the  possession  of  goods  in  regard  to  intestates  ; and 

first  he  gives  the  possession  of  goods,  called  unde  liberi,  to  the 
proper  heirs,  or  to  those,  who  by  the  praetorian  edict,  are  num- 
bered among  the  proper  heirs: secondly,  to  the  legitime  heirs: 

thirdly,  to  ten  persons,  in  preference  to  a  stranger,  who  was 

the  manumittor,  viz.  to  a  father,  a  mother,   or  a  grand-father  or 
grand-mother,  paternal  or  maternal ;  to  a  son,  a  daughter,  or  to  a 
grandson  or  grand-daughter,  as  well  by  a  daughter  as   by  a  son ; 

to  a  brother  or  sister,  either  consanguine  or  uterine: fourthly, 

to  the  nearest  cognates  : fifthly,  to  those  who  are,  as  it  were, 

of  the  family,  tanquam  exfamilia : sixthly,  to  the  patron  or 

patroness,  and  to  their  children,  and  their  parents: seventhly, 

to  a  husband   and  wife : eighthly,  to  the  cognates  of  a  ma- 
numittor or  patron. 

A  new  Law. 

II.  The  praetor's  authority  hath  introduced  these  successions; 
but  we,  not  suffering  any  useless  institutions  to  continue  in  the 
law,  have  nevertheless  admitted  by  our  constitutions  the  posses- 
sion of  goods  contra  tabulas  and  secundum  tabulas,  as  necessary; 
and  also  the  possessions  of  goods  ab  intestato,  called  unde  liberi 
and  unde  legitimi ;  but  we  have  briefly  shewed,  that  the  posses- 
sion  called  unde  decent  persona;,  which  was  ranked  by  the  prtc- 


144 THE  INSTITUTES B.  m.  T.JC, 

tor's  edict  in  the  fifth  order,  was  unnecessary :  for,  whereas  that 
possession  preferred  ten  kinds  of  persons  to  a  stranger,  who  was 
the  manumittor  at  emancipation,  our  constitution,  which  regards 
emancipation,  hath  permitted  all  parents  to  manumit  their  child- 
ren, a  fiduciary  contract  being  presumed  ;  so  that  the  possession 
unde  decem  personce  is  now  useless.  The  afore-mentioned  fifth 
possession  being  thus  abrogated,  we  have  now  made  that  the  fifth, 
which  was  formerly  the  sixth,  by  which  the  praetor  gives  the 
succession  to  the  nearest  cognates.  And,  whereas  formerly  the 
possession  of  goods,  called  tanquam  ex  familia,  was  in  the  se- 
venth place,  and  the  possession  of  goods  called  unde  patroni 
patroriwque,  liberi  et  parcntes  eorum,  was  in  the  eighth,  we  have 
now  annulled  them  both  by  our  ordinance  concerning  the  right 
of  patronage.  And  having  brought  the  successions  of  the  libertini 
to  a  similitude  with  those  of  the  ingenui,  (except  that  we  have 
limited  the  former  to  the  fifth  degree,  so  that  there  may  still  re- 
main some  difference  between  them,)  we  think  that  the  posses- 
sions contra  tabulas — unde  legitimi — and  unde  cognati,  may  suf- 
fice, by  which  all  persons  may  vindicate  their  rights,  the  niceties 
and  inextricable  errors  of  those  two  kinds  of  possessions,  tanqu&rn 
ex  familia  and  unde  patroni,  being  removed.  The .  other  posses- 
sion of  goods,  called  vir  et  uxor,  which  held  the  ninth  placeamong 
the  antient  possessions,  we  have  preserved  in  full  force,  and  have 
placed  in  an  higher  degree,  namely,  the  sixth.  The  tenth  of  the 
antient  possessions,  called  unde  cognati  manumissoris,  being  de- 
servedly abrogated  for  causes  already  enumerated,  there  now  re- 
main only  in  force  six  ordinary  possessions  of  goods. 
Extraordinary  Possession. 

III.  But  to  these  a  seventh  possession  hath  been  added,  which 
the  praetors  have  introduced  with  the  greatest  reason:  for,  by 
edict,  this  possession  of  goods  is  promised  to  all  those,  to  whom 
it  is  appointed  to  be  given  by  any  law,senatus-consultum,  or  con- 
stitution: and  the  praetor  hath  not  positively  numbered  this  pos- 
session of  goods  either  with  the  possessions  of  the  goods  of  intes- 
tate or  testate  persons,  but  hath  given  it,  according  to  the  exi- 
gence of  the  case,  as  the  last  and  extraordinary  resource  of  those, 
\vho  are  called  to  the  successions  of  testates  or  intestates,  by  any 
particular  law,  any  decree  of  the  senate,  or  any  new  constitution. 

Of  the  Successor^  Edict.  <*w 

IV.  The  praetor,  having  introduced  many  kinds  of  successions, 
and   ranked  them  in  order,  hath  thought  proper,   inasmuch!  as 
many  persons  of  different  degrees  are  often  found  in  one  species 
of  succession,  to  limit  a  certain  time  for  demanding  the  possession 


II 


III.  T.  X. 


OF  JUSTINIAN.  145 


of  goods,  to  the  intent,  that  the  actions  of  creditors  may  not  be 
delayed  for  want  of  a  proper  person,  against  whom  to  bring 
them,  and  that  the  creditors  themselves  may  not  obtain  the  pos- 
session of  the  effects  of  the  deceased  too  easily,  and  so  consult 
solely  their  own  advantage:  therefore,  to  parents  and  children, 
whether  natural  or  adopted,  the  praetor  hath  given  the  space  of 
one  year,  in  which  they  may  either  accept  or  refuse  the  posses- 
sion of  goods.  But  to  all  other  persons,  agnates  or  cognates,  he 
allows  only  a  hundred  days. 

B  **  $y^-b: 

Of  the  Right  of  Accretion^B 

V.  And,  if  any  person  intitled  does  not  claim  the  possession 
of  goods  within  the  time  limited,  his  right  of  possession  accrues 
first  to  those  in  the  same  degree  with  himself;  and,  in  default  of 
persons  in  the  same  degree,  then  the  praetor,  by  the  successory 
edict,  bestows  the  possession  of  goods  upon  those  in  the  next 
degree,  as  if  he  who  preceded  had  no  right.  And,  if  any  man 
refuses  the  possession  of  goods,  when  it  is  open  to  him,  there  is  no 
necessity  to  wait  till  the  time  limited  is  expired,  but  those  who 
are  the  next  in  succession  may  be  instantly  admitted  by  virtue  of 
the  before-mentioned  edict. 

gfio(VI.  It  is  here  to  be  observed,  that,  in  regard  to  the  time  pre- 
scribed for  demanding  the  possession  of  goods,  we  count  all  the 
days  which  are  utiles;  i.  e.  those  days  on  which  the  party,  having 
knowledge  that  the  inheritance  is  open  to  him,  might  apply  to 
the  judge. 

Form  of  demanding. 

VII.  The  emperors,  our  predecessors,  have  wisely  provided  in 
this  case,  that  no  person  need  be  solicitous  to  demand  the  posses- 
sion of  goods  in  solemn  form  :  for,  if  by  any  act  it  manifestly  ap- 
pears, that  a  man  has  in  any  manner  consented  to  accept  the  prae- 
torian succession  within  the  prescribed  time,  he  shall  enjoy  the 
full  benefit  of  it»t  Wr> 


TITLE  XL  #WSfci> 

OF  ACQUISITION  BY  ABROGATION. 

THERE  is  also  an  universal  succession  of  another  kind,  which 
was  introduced  neither  by  the  laws  of  the  twelve  tables,  nor  by 
the  edict  of  the  praetor,  but  by  that  law  which  takes  its  rise  from 
general  consent  and  usage. 

What  Things  are  thus  acquired. 

I.  For  example,  if  the  father  of  a  family  gave  himself  in   arro- 
gation,  all  things  which  appertained  to  him,  whether  corporeal  or 
VOL.  1.  No.  5.  T 


146 THE  INSTITUTES  s.  in.  T.  x-i. 

incorporeal,  and  whatever  was  due  to  him,  became  antiently  the 
property  of  the  arrogator ;  those  things  only  excepted,-  which 
perished  by  diminution  or  change  of  state;  as  the  duties  of 
freed-men  to  their  patrons  and  the  rights  of  agnation.  But, 
although  use  and  usufruct  were  heretofore  numbered  among  those 
rights  which  perished  by  diminution,  yet  our  constitution  hath 
prohibited  that  the  use  and  usufruct  of  things  should  be  taken 
away  by  the  least  diminution  or  change  of  state.' 

New  Law. 

II.  But  we  have  now  limited  the  acquisitions  obtained  by  arro- 
gation,  in  similitude  of  what  is  gained  by  natural  parents :  for 
nothing  is  now  acquired  either  by  natural  or  adoptive  parents,, 
but  the  bare  usufruct  of  those  things,  which  their  children  pos- 
sess adventitiously  and  extrinsically  in  their  own  right,  the  pro- 
perty still  remaining  intire  in  the  adopted  or  natural  child.     But, 
if  an  arrogated  son  dies  under  the  power  of  his  arrogator,  then 
even  the  property  of  the  effects  of  such  son  will  pass  to  the  ar- 
rogator in  default  of  those  persons,  whom  we  have  by  our  con- 
stitution preferred  to  the  father  in  the  succession  of  those  things, 
which  could  not  be  acquired  for  him. 

Effect  of  this  Acquisition. 

III.  On  the  contrary  an  arrogator  is  not  bound  at  law  to  satisfy 
the  debts  of  his  adopted  son  in  consequence  of  a  direct  action ; 
but  yet  he  may  be  convened  in  his  son's  name;  and,  if  he  refuses 
to  defend  his  son,  then  the  creditors,  by  order  of  the  proper  ma- 
.gistrates,  may  seize  upon  and  legally  sell  all  those  goods,  of  which 
the  usufruct,  as  well  as  the  property,  would  both  have  been  in 
the  debtor,  if  he  had  not  made  himself  subject  to  the  power  of 
another. 


TITLE  XII. 

NEW  SPECIES  OF  SUCCESSION. 

A  NEW  species  of  succession  hath  taken  its  rise  from  the  con- 
stitution of  Marcus  Aurelius.  For,  if  those  slaves,  to  whom  free- 
dom hath  been  bequeathed,  are  desirous,  for  the  sake  of  obtain^ 
ing  it,  that  the  inheritance,  which  hath  not  been  accepted  by  the 
written  heir,  should  be  adjudged  for  their  benefit,  they  shall  ob- 
tain their  request. 

Rescript  oj  Marcus. 

I.  And  to  the  same  effect  is  the  rescript  of  the  emperor  Marcus 
to  Pompilius  Rufus ;  the  words  of  which  are  these:  "  If  the 
estate  of  Virginius  Valens,  who  by  testament  hath  bequeathed  to 


B.  in.  T.  xi  r.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  147 

certain  persons  their  freedom,  must  necessarily  be  sold,  and  there 
is  no  successor  ab  intestato,  then  the  magistrate,  who  has  the  cog- 
nizance of  these  affairs,  shall  upon  application  hear  the  merits  of 
your  cause,  that,  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  liberty  of  those 
to  whom  it  was  given,  either  directly  or  in  trustrthe  estate  of 
the  deceased  may  be  adjudged  to  you,  on  condition,  that  you  give 
good  security  to  the  creditors,  to  pay  them  the  whole  of  their  just 
demands.  And  all  those  to  whom  freedom  was  directly  given, 
shall  then  become  free,  as  if  the  inheritance  had  been  entered 
upon  by  the  written  heir;  but  those,  whom  the  heir  was  ordered 
to  manumit,  shall  obtain  their  freedom  from  you  only.  And,  if  you 
are  not  willing  that  the  goods  of  the  deceased  should  beadjudged 
to  you  on  any  other  condition,  than  that  even  they,  who  received 
their  liberty  directly  by  testament,  shall  also  become  your  freed- 
men,  we  then  order,  that  your  will  shall  be  complied  with,  if  the 
persons  agree  to  it  who  are  to  receive  their  freedom.  And,  lest 
the  use  and  emolument  of  this  our  rescript  should  be  frustrated 
by  any  other  means,  be  it  known  to  the  officers  of  our  revenue, 
that,  whenever  our  exchequer  lays  claim  to  the  estate  of  a  de- 
ceased person,  the  cause  of  liberty  is  to  be  preferred  to  any  pe^ 
cuniary  advantage  ;  and  that  the  estate  shall  be  so  seized,  as  to 
preserve  the  freedom  of  those  who  could  otherwise  have  obtained 
it ;  and  this  in  as  full  a  manner,  as  if  the  inheritance  had  been  en* 
tered  upon  by  the  testamentary  heir," 

Use  of  this  Rescript. 

II.  The  contents  of  this  rescript  are  calculated  not  only  in  favor 
of  liberty,  but  also  for  the  benefit  of  deceased  persons,  lest  their 
effects  should  be  seized  and  sold  by  their  creditors:  for  it  is  cer- 
tain, that,  when  goods  are  adjudged  to  a  particular  man,  for  the 
preservation  of  liberty,  a  sale  by  creditors  can  never  take  effect: 
for  he  to  whom  the  goods  are  adjudged  is  the  protector  of  the  de- 
ceased, and  must  always  be  a  person  who  can  give  security  for. 
the  full  payment  of  creditors. 

Its  Application. 

III.  This  rescript  takes  place,  whenever  freedom  is  .conferred 
by  testament.     But,  when  a  master  dies  intestate,    having  be- 
queathed freedom  to  his  slaves  by  codicil,  and  his  inheritance  is, 
not  entered  upon,   what  will  then  be  the  consequence?     We 
answer,  that  the  favour  of  the  rescript  shall  extend  to  this  case  ; 
but  it  is  most  certainly  not  to  be  doubted,  that,  if  a  master  dies, 
testate,  and  by  codicil  bequeaths  freedom,  the  rescript  shall  be  of 
full  force, 


148  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  r. 

IV.  The  words  of  the  rescript  shew,  that  it  is  then  in  force, 
when  there  is  absolutely  no  successor  ab  intestato.     It  therefore 
follows,  that,  as  long  as  it  remains  doubtful,  whether  there  is  or 
is  not  a  successor,  the  constitution  shall  not  take  place  :  but,  when 
once  it  is  certain  that  no  one  will  enter  upon  the  succession,  the 
ordinance  shall  then  have  its  effect^  ±*  .noimqo  TUO  gfiiscf  Jc  ,JuS 

V.  But,  if  he  who  has  a  right  to  be  restored  in  intcgrum  (as  a 
minor,  for  example)  should  delay  to  take  upon  him  the  inherit- 
ance of  his  father,  it  may  then  be  asked,  whether,  notwithstand- 
ing this  right  of  being  restored,  the  constitution  shall  take  place, 
and  an  adjudication  of  the  goods   pass  to  a  stranger,  or  one  of 
the  slaves?     And  again,   it  may  be  demanded,   what  will  be  the 
consequence,  if,  after  an  adjudication  has  been  made  for  the  sake 
of  liberty,  the  heir  should  be  restored  in  integrum  9    We  answer, 
that  freedom,   when  once   obtained,    shall  not  afterwards   be 
revoked. 

VI.  This  constitution  was  made  for  the  protection  of  liberty  ; 
and  therefore,  when  freedom  is  not  given,  the  constitution  has  no 
effect.     Suppose  then,  that  a  master  hath  given  freedom  to  his 
slaves  either  inter  vivos  or  mortis  causa,  and  that  they,  to  prevent 
the  creditors  from  complaining  that  this  was  done  to  defraud 
them,  should  petition,  that  the  estate  of  the  deceased  may  be  ad- 
judged to  them,  are  these  persons  to  be  heard?   We  answer,  that 
we  incline  to  grant  their  request,  although  in  this  case  the  letter 
of  the  constitution  is  deficient. 

VII.  But  perceiving  that  the  rescript  was  deficient  in  many 
respects,  we  enacted  a  most  express  constitution,  containing  many 
cases  which  explain  the  rights  of  succession  in  the  fullest  manner ; 
of  which  every  person  who  reads  that  constitution  will  be  sensible. 

TITLE  XIII. 
CLAUDIAN  DECREE. 

THERE  were  many  other  kinds  of  universal  successions  before 
that,  which  we  treated  of  in  the  foregoing  title ;  as  the  bonorum 
emptio,  which  was  first  introduced,  that  the  estates  of  debtors 
might  be  sold  ;  but  this  was  accompanied  by  many  intricate  and 
tedious  proceedings  ;  it  continued  nevertheless  as  long  as  the  ordi- 
nary judgments  were  in  practice;  but,  as  soon  as  the  extraordi- 
nary  judgments  were  made  use  of,  the  solemn  emptio  bonorum 
ceased  at  the  same  time  with  the  ordinary  judgments.  And  cre- 
ditors can  now  possess  themselves  of  the  goods  of  their  debtors 
and  dispose  of  them,  as  they  think  most  proper,  by  the  decree 
of  a  judge.  But  these  points  are  treated  of  more  perfectly  and  at 


B.  .in.  T.  xv.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


large  in  the  books  of  our  digests.  There  was  also,  by  virtue  of 
the  Claudian  decree,  another  universal  acquisition  called  misera- 
bilis:  for  example,  if  a  free-woman  had  debased  herself  by  being 
enamoured  of  a  slave,  she  lost  her  freedom  by  the  before  named 
decree,  and,  together  with  her  freedom,  her  estate  and  substance. 
But,  it  being  our  opinion,  that  this  part  of  the  decree  was  un- 
worthy of  our  reign,  and  ought  therefore  to  be  expunged  from 
our  laws,  we  have  not  permitted  it  to  be  inserted  in  the  digests.^ 

TITLE  XIV 
}0*$tto  10  {l^feM:^ 
3f)t  scJ  Mrw  .i  OBLIGATIONS. 

LET  us  now  pass  to  obligations.  An  obligation  is  the  chain 
of  the  law,  by  which  we  are  necessarily  bound  so  make  some 
payment,  according  to  the  laws  of  our  country. 

I.  Obligations  are  primarily  divided  into  two  kinds,  civil  and 
prcetorian.  Civil  obligations  are  those,  which  are  constituted  by 
the  laws,  or  by  any  species  of  the  civil  law.  Prcetorian  obliga- 
tions are  those,  which  the  praetor  hath  appointed  by  his  authority; 

and  these  are  also  called  honorary. 

'^  *'  v  •»•«"'  •*'*  '^jV^  ''(*<nl  if)  -f^^fSif, 

•  j,JL  The  second  or  subsequent  division  of  obligations  contains 

four  species  ;  for  some  obligations  arise  by  contract,  others  by 
qiiasi-contract  ;  some  by  malefeasance,  and  others  by  quasi-male- 
feasance.  We  must  first  treat  of  those  obligations,  which  arise  from 
a  contract  ;  and  of  these  there  are  also  four  kinds  :  for  obligations 
.are  contracted  by  the  thing  itself,  by  word  of  mouth,  by  writ- 
ing, or  by  the  mere  consent  of  parties.  Let  us  now  take  a  sepa- 
rate view  of  each  of  these  methods  of  contracting. 


TITLE  XV. 

OF  THE    DIFFERENT    MODES    OF  OBLIGATION. 

Of  Loan. 

obligation  is  contracted  by  the  thing  itself;  that  is,  by  the 
delivery  of  it,  as  a  loan  or  mutuum :  and  any  particular  thing, 
which  consists  of  weight,  number,  or  measure,  as  wine,  oil,  corn, 
coin,  brass,  silver,gold,  may  be  delivered  as  a  mutuum  ;  and  these 
substances,  when  so  delivered,  become  in  specie  the  absolute  pro- 
perty of  the  receiver :  and,  since  the  very  identical  things  lent 
cannot  be  restored,  but  others  of  the  same  nature  and  quality 
must  be  paid  in  lieu  of  them,  this  loan  is  therefore  called  a  mu- 
tuum', for  in  this  case  I  so  give,  that  ichat  is  mine  may  become 

yours:  itt  ex  MEO  TUUM  fiat.     From   this  contract  arises   that 

i-          u-  u  •       ,11         •        7-  x-  v-?oq^o  r 

action,  which  is  called  cerU  condtctto.  ^  ^ 


130 THE  INSTITUTES jp.ni.  T.  xv. 

Of  erroneous  Payment. 

I.  He  also,  who  hath  received  what  was  not  due  to  him,  it  being 
paid  or  delivered  by  mistake,  is  bound  by  the  thing  received,  so 
that  an  action  of  condiction  lies  against  him  for  the  recovery  of  the 
thing,  at  the  suit  of  him,  who  paid  or  delivered  it  erroneously. 
And  this  action  may  be  brought  against  the  receiver  in  these  words, 
si  apparet,  cum  dare  opportere  ;  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  he  had 
accepted  the  thing  delivered,  as   a  mutuum.    And   hence  it  isA 
that  a  pupil,   when  a  payment  of  any   thing  not  due  hath  been 
made  to  him  without  the  authority  of  his  tutor,  is  not  subject  to 
the  action  called  condictio  indebiti ;  because  he  is  not  subject  to 
an  action  on   account  of  the  delivery  of  the  thing,  as  a  mutuum. 
And  yet  this  species  of  obligation  does  not  seem  to  proceed  from 
a  contract;  since  he,  who  pays  with  an  intention  to  satisfy  his 
debts,  appears  more  willing  to  dissolve,  than  to  make,  a  contract. 

Of  Commodation. 

II.  He  also,  to  whom  the  use  of  any  particular  thing  is  granted 
or  commodated,  is  bound  by  the  delivery  of  the  thing,  and  is  sub- 
ject to  an  action  called  commodataria.     But  such  person  widely 
differs  from  him,  who  hath  received  a  mutuum  :  for  a  cammodatum, 
or  thing  lent,  is  not  delivered,  to  the  intent  that  it  should  become 
the  property  of  the  receiver ;  and  therefore  he  is  bound  to  restore 
the  identical  thing,  which  he  hath  received.     There  is  also  ano~ 
ther  difference;  for  he,  who  hath  accepted  "a  mutuum,  is  not  freed 
from  his  obligation,  if  even  by  any  accident,  as  by  the  fall  of  an 
edifice,  fire,  shipwreck,  thieves,  or  the  incursions  of  an  enemy, 
he  hath  lost  what  he  hath  received  :  but  he,  who  hath  received  a 
commodatum,  or  a  thing  lent  for  his  use  only,  is  indeed  commanded 
to  employ  his  utmost  diligence  in  keeping  and  preserving  it;  (and 
it  will  not  suffice,  that  he  bath  taken  the  same  care  of  it,  which 
he  was  accustomed  to  take  of  his   own  property,  if  it  appears, 
that  a  more  diligent  man  might  have  preserved  it ;)  yet,  if  it  is 
evident,  that  the  loss  of  it  was  occasioned  by  a  superior  force,  or 
some  extraordinary  accident,  and  not  by  any  fault,  he  is  then  not 
obliged  to  make  good  the  "loss  ;  but,  if  a  man  by  choice  will  travel 
with  what  he  has  received  as  a  commodatum  or  loan,  and  should 
lose  it  by  shipwreck,  or  by  the  incursion  of  enemies,  or  robbers, 
it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  he  is  bound  to  make  restitution, 
or  to  pay  an  equivalent.     A  thing  is  properly  said  to  be  lent  or 
commodated,  when  one  man  permits  another  to  enjoy  the  use  of 
it,  and  receives  nothing  by  way  of  hire :  but,  if  a  price  for  hire  is 
paid,  the  thing  is  let,  and  not  lent ;   for  a  commodatum,  or  loan, 
must  be  gratuitous. 


B.  in.  T.  xvi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  151 

Of  a  Deposit.  !    , 

III.  Any  person,  who  is  entrusted  with  a  deposit,  is  bound  by 
the  delivery  of  the  thing,  and  is  subject  to  an  action  of  deposit, 
because  he  is  under  an  obligation  of  making  restitution  of  that 
very  thing,  which  he   received.     But  a  depositary    is  only  thus 
answerable  on  account  of  fraud ;  for  where  a  fault  only  can  be 
proved  against  him,  such  as  negligence,  he  is  under  no  obligation ; 
and  he  is  therefore  secure,  if  the  thing  deposited  is  stolen  from 
him,  even  although  it  was  carelessly  kept.     For  he,  who  com- 
mits his  goods  to  the  care  of  a  negligent  friend,  should  impute  the 
loss  of  them,  not  to  his  friend,  but  to  his  own  facility  and  want 
of  caution. 

Of  a  Pledge. 

IV.  A  creditor  also,  who  hath  received  a  pledge,  is  bound  by 
the  delivery  of  it ;  for  he  is  obliged  to  restore   the   very  thing, 
which  he  hath  received,  by  the  action  called  pigncratitia.     But, 
inasmuch  as  a  pledge  is  given    for  the.  mutual  service  of  both, 
debtor  and  creditor,  (of  the  debtor,  that  he  may  obtain  the  money 
the  more  easily,  and  of  the  creditor,  that  the  repayment  may  be 
the  better  secured,)  it  will  suffice,  if  the  creditor  shall  appear  to 
have  used  an  exact  diligence  in  keeping  the  thing  pledged  :  for, 
if  such  diligence  appears  to  have  been  used,  and  the  pledge  was 
lost  by  mere  accident,  the  law  secures  the  creditor,  as  to  the  loss 
of  the  thing  pledged,  and  he  is  by  no  means  impeded  to  sue 
his  debt. 

TITLE  XVI. 

OF  OBLIGATION  BY  WORDS. 

AN  obligation  in  words  is  made  by  question  and  answer,  when 
we  stipulate,  that  any  thing  shall  be  given  or  done ;  and  from 
hence  arise  two  actions,  viz.  the  action  called  condictio.  certi, 
when  the  stipulation  is  certain;  and  the  action  called  condictio 
€x  stipulatu,  when  the  stipulation  is  uncertain.  This  obligation 
is  called  a  stipulation,  because  whatever  was  firm  was  termed  sti- 
pulum  by  the  ancients ;  the  word  stipulum  being  probably  de- 
rived from  stipes ,  denoting  the  trunk  of  a  tree. 
Of  the  Words  of  Stipulation. 

I.  The  following  words  were  formerly  used  in  all  verbal  obli- 
gations. 

Spondes?  Spondeo. 
Promittis  ?  Promitto. 
Fide-promittis?  Fide-promitto. 


152  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  m.  T.  xvi. 

Fide-jubes?  Fide-jubeo. 

Dabis?  Dabo. 

Facies?  Faciam. 

And  it  is  not  material,  whether  the  stipulation  is  conceived  in 
Latin,  Greek,  or  any  other  language,  if  the  stipulating  parties  un- 
derstand it:  neither  is  it  necessary,  that  the  same  language  should 
be  used  by  each  person;  for  it  is  sufficient,  if  a  congruent  and 
pertinent  answer  is  made  to  each  question.  It  is  moreover  certain, 
that  two  Greeks  may  contract  in  Latin.  Anciently  indeed  it 
was  necessary  to  use  those  solemn  words  before  recited ;  but  the 
constitution  of  the  Emperor  Leo  was  afterwards  enacted,  which 
takes  away  this  verbal  solemnity,  and  requires  only  the  appre- 
hension and  consent  of  each  party,  expressed  in  any  form  of  words. 

Of  Pure  Stipulation. 

II.  Every  stipulation  is  made  to  be  performed  simply,  or  at  a 
day  certain,  or  conditionally.    A  stipulation  is  made  to  be  per- 
formed simply,  when  a  man  says  do  you  promise  to  pay  me  five 
Aurei  ?  arid,  in  this  case,  the  money  may  be  instantly  demanded. 
A  stipulation  is  made  to  be  performed  at  a  day  certain,  when  the 
day  is  added,  on  which  the  money  is  to  be  paid  ;  as  when  a  man 
says  "  do  you  promise  to  pay  me  ten   Aurei  on  the  first  of 
March  ?"  but  note,  that  what  we  stipulate  to  pay  at  a  day  certain, 
though  it  becomes  immediately  due,  yet  it  cannot  be  demanded  be- 
fore the  day  comes ;  nor  can  it  even  then  be  sued ;  for  the  whole 
day  must  be  allowed  for  payment ;  because  it  can  never  be  cer- 
tain, that  there  hath  been  a  failure  of  payment  on  the  day  pro- 
mised, until  that  day  is  quite  expired. 

III.  But,  if  a  man  thus  stipulates ;   viz.   do  you  promise  to 
give  me  ten  Aurei  annually,  as  long  as  I  live?   the  obligation  is 
understood  to  be  made  purely  or  simply,  and  becomes  perpetual 
so  as  to  bind  the  heirs  of  the  obligor ;   for  an  obligation  cannot 
continue  due  for  a  time  certain  only  :  yet,  if  the  heir  of  the  sti- 
pulator  demands  payment,  he  shall  be  barred  by  an  exception 
of  agreement. 

Of  Conditional  Stipulation. 

IV.  A  stipulation  is  conditional,  when  an  obligation  is  referred 
to  an  accident,  and  depends  upon  some  thing  to  be  done  or  not 
done,  to  happen  or  not  to  happen,  before  the  stipulation  can  take 
effect:  for  instance,  if  a  man  stipulates  thus;  "  do  you  promise  to 
pay  me  five  Aurei,  if  Titius  is  made  a  consul  ?"  or  thus,  "  do  you 
promise  to  pay  me  five  Aurei,  if  I  do  not  ascend  the  capitol  ?" 
which  last  stipulation  is  in  effect  the  same,  as  if  he  had  stipulated, 
that  five  Aurei  should  de  paid  to  him  at  the  time  of  his  death. 


OF  JUSTINIAN.  153 


It  is  to  be  observed,  that,  in  every  conditional  stipulation,  there 
is  only  an  hope,  thai  the  thing  stipulated  will  become  due;  and 
this  hope  a  man  transmits  to  his  heirs,  if  he  dies  before  the  event 

of  the  condition. 

i.  nodfijirqiin  9i&  Jfttodw  JB  bnA 

~ni/  89tf*T6<f  ^flitofpaiJe  r          ^      ["  MJ     ••-'ff+o  vrus        •*!«  -/""i.    >*    ? 

V.  Even  places  are  often  inserted  in  a  stipulation  ;    as  ioreS> 

ample,  "  do  you  promise  to  give  me  such  a  particular  thing  at 
Carthage?"  and  this  stipulation,  though  it  appears  to  be  made  sim- 
ply, yet  in  reality  carries  with  it  a  space  of  time,  which  the 
obligor  may  make  use  of  to  inable  himself  to  pay  the  money  pro- 
mised at  Carthage.  And  therefore,  if  a  man  at  Rome  should  stipu- 
late in  these  words,  "  do  you  promise  to  pay  me  a  sum  of  money 
this  day  at  Carthage?"  the  stipulation  would  be  null,  because 
the  performance  of  it  would  be  impossible. 

Of  Conditions  as  respects  Time. 

VI.  Conditions,  which  relate  to  time  present  or  past,  either 
jnstantly  annul  an  obligation,  or  instantly  inforce  it  ;  for  example, 
if  a  man  should  thus  stipulate,   "  do  you  promise  me  the  pay- 
ment of  a  sum  of  money,   if  Titius  hath  ever  been  a  consul  ?'* 
or  thus,  "  if  Maevius  is  now  living?'*  if  these  things  are  not  so, 
that  is,  if  Titius  hath  never  been  a  consul,  and  Maevius  is  not 
now,  living,  the  stipulation  is  void  ;  and  if  they  are  so,  that  is,  if 
Titius  hath  been  a  consul,  and  Maevius  is  actually  living,  then 
the  stipulation  is  good  and  may  be  inforced  ;   for  events,  which 
in  themselves  are  certain,  delay  not  the  performance  of  an  obliga- 
tion, although  to  us  they  are  not  certain. 

SS^'H,1?.311     -H  «Lfld9p.*tt6ri 

The  Subjects  of  Stipulation. 

,  VII.  Not  only  things,  as  a  field,  a  slave,  or  a  book,  but  also  acts, 
may  be  the  subject  of  stipulations  ;  as  when  we  stipulate,  that 
something  shall,  or  shall  not  be  done.  And,  in  these  stipulations, 
it  will  be  right  to  subjoin  a  penalty,  lest  the  value  of  the  stipula- 
tion should  be  uncertain,  and  the  demandant  should  therefore  be 
forced  to  prove  how  far  he  is  interested  in  it.  And  therefore,  if 
a  man  stipulates,  that  something  shall  be  done,  a  penalty  ought 
to  be  thus  added  ;  "  do  you  not  promise  to  pay  me  ten  AUREI,  as 
as  a  penalty,  if  the  act  stipulated  is  not  performed  ?"  But,  if  it  is 
agreed  in  the  same  obligation,  that  some  things  shall  be  done,  and 
t^at  others  shall  not  be  clone,  then  ought  some  such  clause,  as  the 
follow  jng,  to  be  added  ;  "  do  you  promise  to  pay  me  ten  AUREI, 
as  a  penalty,  if  any  thing  is  done  contrary  to  agreement  ;  or  if  any 
thing  is  not  done  according  to  our  agreement  ? 

VOL    1   No   1  U  ^m  °*  ssiflttnc 

•flms'Mfl'ffrr  fa  tolfo  ai 


suHo  smil  sdJta  jmd  ot  fcifiq  sb  Wuorfe  isiuA  avft 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  xvir. 


TITLE  XVII. 

OF  THE  PARTIES  STIPULATING. 

TWO  or  more  persons  may  stipulate,  and  two  or  more  may  be- 
come obligors.  The  stipulating  parties  are  bound,  if,  after  all 
questions  have  been  asked,  the  obligor  answers,  "  I  promise  ;"  as 
when,  for  example,  the  obligor  thus  answers  two  persons  sepa- 
rately stipulating,  "  I  promise  to  pay  each  of  you."  For,  if  he 
first  promises  Titius,  and  afterwards  promises  another,  who  in- 
terrogates him,  there  will  then  be  two  obligations,  and  not  two 
stipulators  to  one  obligation.  Two  or  more  become  obligors,  if, 
after  they  have  been  thus  interrogated,  "  MJEVIUS,  do  you  pro- 
mise to  pay  us  ten  AUREI  ?  and,  SEIUS,  do  you  promise  to  pay  u* 
the  same  ten  AUREI  ?"  they  each  of  them  answer  separately,  "  I 
do  promise." 

I.  By  these  stipulations  and  obligations  the  whole  sum  stipulated 
becomes  due  to  every  person  stipulating,  and  every  obligor  is 
bound  for  the  payment  of  the  whole.    But  as  one  and  the  same 
thing  is  due  by  each  obligation,  therefore  any  one  of  the  stipula- 
tors by  receiving  the  debt,  and  any  one  of  the  obligors  by  paying 
it,  discharges  the  obligation  of  the  rest,  and  frees  all  parties. 

II.  Where  there  are  two  obligors,  the  one  may  bind  himself 
purely  and  simply,  and  the  other  may  oblige  himself  only  to  make 
payment  on  a  day  certain,  or  upon  condition  :  but  neither  the  day 
certain,  nor  the  condition,  will  secure  the  person,  who  is  simply 
bound,  from  being  sued  for  the  payment  of  the  whole. 


TITLE  XVIII. 

OF  THE  STIPULATIONS  OF  SLAVES. 

A  SLAVE  obtains  the  liberty  of  stipulating  from  the  person  of 
his  master;  but  in  many  instances  the  inheritance  represents  the 
person  of  a  master  deceased  :  and  therefore  whatever  an  heredi- 
tary slave  stipulates  for,  before  the  inheritance  is  entered  upon,  he 
acquires  it  for  the  inheritance ;  and  of  course  for  him,  who  after- 
wards becomes  the  heir. 

Of  the  effect  of  Stipulation  by  a  Slave. 

I.  A  slave,  let  him  stipulate  how  he  will,  for  his  master,  for 
himself,  for  a  fellow  slave,  or  generally  without  naming  any  per- 
son, always  acquires  for  his  master.  And  the  same  obtains  among 
children,  who  are  under  the  power  of  their  father,  in  regard  to 
those  things,  which  they  can  acquire  for  him. 


*?.  in.  T.  xrin.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  155 

Of  the  Stipulation  of  an  Act. 

II.  But,  when  a  fact  or  thing  to  be  done  is  contained  in  a  stipula- 
tion, the  person  of  the  stipulator  is  solely  regarded ;  so  that,  if  even 
a  slave  stipulates,  that  he  shall  be  permitted  to  pass  through  a  field, 
and  to  drive  beasts  or  a  carriage  through  it,  it  is  not  the  master, 
but  the  slave  only,  who  is  to  be  permitted  to  pass. 

Of  a  Slave  in  common. 

III.  If  a  slave,  who  is  in  common  to  several  masters,  stipulates, 
he  acquires  a  share  for  each  master  according  to  the  proportion, 
which  each  has  in  the  property  of  him.    But,  if  such  slave  should 
stipulate  at  the  command  of  any  particular  master,  or  in  his  name, 
the  thing  stipulated  will  be  acquired  solely  for  that  master.     And 
•whatever  a  slave  in  common  to  two  masters  stipulates  for,  if  part 
cannot  be  acquired  for  one  master,  the  whole  shall  be  acquired 
for  the  other ;  as  when  the  thing  stipulated  already  belongs  to 
one  of  the  two. 


TITLE  XIX. 

OF  THE  DIVISION  OF  STIPULATION. 

SOME  stipulations  are  judicial,  others  praetorian,  others  conven- 
tional ;  and  others  common  ;  that  is,  both  praetorian  and  judicial. 
Of  judicial  Stipulations. 

I.  The  judicial  are  those  which  proceed  merely  from  the  office 
of  the  judge;  as  when  security  is  ordered  to  be  given  against 
fraud,  or  for  pursuing  a  slave,  who  hath  fled,  or  for  paying  the 
price  of  him. 

Of  Pmtorian  Stipulations. 

II.  The  praetorian  stipulations  are  those,  which  proceed  from 
the  mere  office  of  the  praetor ;  as  when  security  is  ordered  to  be 
given  pro  damno  infecto ;  that  is,  on  account  of  damage  not  yet 
done,  but  likely  to  happen ;  and  for  the  payment  of  legacies.   And 
note,  that  under  praetorian  stipulations  we  comprehend  the  Edili- 
tian;  for  these  proceed  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  praetor. 

Of  Conventional  Stipulation 

III.  Conventional  stipulations  are  those,  which  are  made  by  the 
agreement  of  parties ;  that  is,  neither  by  order  of  a  judge  or  prae- 
tor, but  by  the  consent  of  the  persons  contracting ;  and  of  these  sti- 
pulations there  are  as  many  kinds,  as  of  things  to  be  contracted  for. 

Of  Common. 

IV.  Common  stipulations  are  those,  which  are  ordered  for  the 
security  of  the  effects  of  a  pupil,  (for  the  praetor  ordains  a  caution 
to  be  given  on  this  account,  and  sometimes  a  judge  decrees  it, 
when  there  is  an  absolute  necessity,)  or  for  the  ratification  of  a 
thing  done  in  another's  name. 


156 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  HI.  T.  xx 


TITLE  XX. 

OF    INEFFECTIVE    STIPULATIONS. 

EVERY  thing,  of  which  we  have  the  property,  may  be  brought 
into  stipulation,  whether  it  is  moveable  or  immoveable. 
Of  what  does  not  exist. 

I.  But,  if  a  man  hath  stipulated,  that  a  thing  shall  be  given, 
which  does  not,  or  can  not  exist,  as  for  instance,  that  Stichus,  the 
slave,  who  is  dead,  but  is  thought  to  be  living,  or  that  a  Centaur, 
who  cannot  exist,  should  be  given  to  him,  the  stipulation  is  of 
no  force. 

Of  Things  not  in  Commerce. 

II.  And  the  law  is  the  same,  if  a  thing  sacred,  which  was 
thought  to  be  not  so,  is  brought  into  stipulation ;   or  if  a  man 
stipulates  for  a  thing  of  constant  public  use,  as  a  forum  or  a 
theatre;  or  for  a  free  person,  who  was  thought  to  be  bond;   or 
for  a  thing,  which  he  cannot  acquire ;   or  for  some  thing,  which 
is  already  his  own :  nor  shall  any  such  stipulation  continue  in 
suspense,  because  a  thing  public  may  become  private,  a  freeman 
may  turn  slave,  a  stipulator  may  become  capable  of  acquiring,  or 
because  what  now  belongs  to  the  stipulator  may  cease  to  be  his  ; 
but  every  such  stipulation  shall  be  instantly  void.     And,  on  the 
contrary,  although  a  thing  may  properly  be  brought  into  stipula- 
tion at  first,  yet,  if  it  afterwards  falls  under  the  class  of  any  of  the 
things  before  mentioned  without  the  fault  of  the  obligor,  the 
stipulation   is  extinguished.     And   such   a   stipulation,   as   the 
following  shall  never  be  valid  : — for  instance,  "  do  you  promise  to 
give  me  Lucius  Titius,  when  he  shall  become  a  slave?"  for  those 
things,  which  in  their  natures  are  exempt  from  our  dominion, 
are  by  no  means  to  be  brought  into  obligation. 

Of  an  engagement  for  others. 

III.  If  a  man  promises,  that  another  shall  give  or  do  something, 
such  promissor  shall  not  be  bound;  as  if  a  man  should  promise, 
"that  Titius  shall  pay  five  Aurei:"  but,  if  he  promises,  that  he 
will  cause  Titius  to  pay  five  Aurei,  his  promise  shall  be  binding. 

Of  Payment  by  another. 

IV.  If  a  man  stipulates  for  any  other,  than  for  him,  to  whom 
he  is  subject,  such  stipulation  is  a  void  act :   but  nevertheless  a 
payment  of  a  thing  promised  may  be  made  to  a  stranger ;  as  if  a 
man  should  thus  stipulate,  do  you  promise  to  make  payment  to 
me,  or  to  Seius?  for,  when  the  obligation  is  to  the  stipulator,  the 
payment  may  well  be  made  to  Seius,  though  against  his  will :  and 
this  is  allowed  in  favor  of  the  debtor,  that  he  may  be  legally 


B  in.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  157 

freed  from  his  debt:  and  the  stipulator,  if  there  is  occasion,  may 
have  an  action  of  mandate  against  Seius.  And,  if  a  man  should 
stipulate,  that  ten  Aurei  shall  be  paid  to  him  and  to  another,  not 
under  his  power,  the  stipulation  would  be  good  :  yet  it  hath  been 
a  doubt,  whether  the  whole  sum  due  would  be  due  to  the  stipu- 
lator, or  only  a  moity ;  and  it  hath  been  resolved,  that  the  stipu- 
lator in  this  caseacquires  a  moity  only.  ,  But,  if  you  stipulate  for 
another,  who  is  subject  to  your  power,  you  acquire  for  yourself; 
for  your  own  words  are  reputed  your  son's,  and  your  son's  words 
are  reputed  yours,  in  regard  to  all  those  things,  which  can  possibly 
be  acquired  for  you. 

Of  Interrogation  and  Response. 

V.  A  stipulation  is  void,  if  the  party  interrogated  does  not 
answer  pertinently   to   the  demand  made ;   as   when  a  person 
stipulates,  that  ten  aurei  shall  be  paid  him,  and  you  answer  five; 
or,  vice  versa,  if  he  stipulates  for  five,  and  you  answer,  I  promise 
ten.    A  stipulation  is  also  void,  if  a  man  stipulates  simply,  and 
you  promise  conditionally;  or,  on  the  contrary,  if  he  stipulates 
conditionally,  and  you  answer  purely,  and  in  express  terms;  that 
is,  if,  when  a  man  is  stipulating  conditionally  or  at  a  day  certain, 
you  answer  him  thus;  I  promise  you  payment  on  this  present  day. 
But,  if  you  answer  only,  I  promise,  you  seem  in  brief  speech  to 
agree  to  his  day  or  condition.    For  it  is  not  necessary,  that  in  the 
answer   every  word  should  be  repeated,  which  the  stipulator 
expressed. 

Of  Stipulations  by  those  under  Power. 

VI.  A  stipulation  is  also  void,  if  you  stipulate  with  him,  who 
is  in  subjection  to  your  power,  or  if  he  stipulates  with  you.     For 
a  slave  is  not  only  incapable  of  entering  into  an  obligation  with 
his  master,  but  is  also  incapable  of  binding  himself  to  any  other 
person.     But  the  son  of  a  family  can  enter  into  an  obligation  with 
any  other  person,  except  his  father. 

Of  the  Deaf. 

VII.  It  is  evident,  that  a  dumb  man  can  neither  stipulate,  nor 
promise:  and  the  same  law  is  received  in  regard  to  deaf  persons ; 
for  he,  who  stipulates,  ought  to  hear  the  words  of  the  obligor; 
and  he,  who  promises,  the  words  of  the  stipulator.     But  we  speak 
not  of  him,  who  hears  with  difficulty,  but  of  him,  who  has  no 
hearing. 

Of  the  Insane. 

VIII.  A  madman  can  transact  no  business,  because  he  under- 
stands not  what  he  does. 


158 THE  INSTITUTES B.  m.  T.  x*. 

Of  Pupils. 

IX.  A  pupil  is  capable  of  transacting  any  business,  if  his  tutor 
consents,  where  his  authority  is  necessary ;  as  it  certainly  is,  when 
the  pupil  would  bind  himself:  but  a  pupil  can  stipulate  or  cause 
others  to  be  bound  to  him,  without  the  authority  of  his  tutor. 
What  we  have  said  of  pupils  must  be  understood  of  those,  who 
have  some  understanding ;   for  an  infant,  or  one  next  to  an  infant, 
differs  but  little  from  a  person  out  of  his  senses:  for  pupils  of 
such  an  age  have  no  understanding:  but  a  more  favorable  inter- 
pretation is  given  to  the  law  in  regard  to  those,  who  are  but  little 
removed  from  infancy,  whenever  their  own  utility  is  concerned; 
so  that  they  are  then  allowed  the  same  rights,  as  those,  who  are 
near  the  age  of  puberty.     But  a  son,  who  is  under  the  power  of 
his  father,  and  within  the  age  of  puberty,  cannot  bind  himself, 
«ven  although  his  father  consents,  and  authorises  the  transaction. 

Of  impossible  Conditions. 

X.  If  an  impossible  condition  is  added  to  an  obligation,  the 
stipulation  is  null;   and  that  condition  is  reckoned  impossible,  of 
which  nature  forbids  the  event:  as,  for  example,  if  a  man  should 
say,  do  you  promise  me  ten  Aurci,  if  I  touch  the  heavens  with  my 
Jingerf   but  suppose  a  stipulation  to  be  thus  made;    "do  you 
promise  me  payment,  if  I  do  not  touch  the  sky  with  my  finger?" 
such  a  stipulation  would  be  understood  to  cause  a  simple  obliga- 
tion, the  performance  of  which  might  be  instantly  demanded. 

Of  Absence. 

XI.  A  verbal  obligation,  made  between  absent  persons,  is  als<» 
void.     But,  when  this  doctrine  afforded  matter  of  strife  to  con- 
tentious men,  alleging  after  some  time  past,  that  either  they  or 
the  other  parties  were  not  present,  we  issued  our  constitution, 
addressed  as  a  rescript  to  the  advocates  of  Caesarea,  which  effec- 
tually provided  for  the  speedy  determination  of  such  suits:  and 
by  this  we  have  ordained,  that  full  credit  shall  be  given  to  those 
•written  acts,  or  instruments,  which  declare,  that  the  contracting 
parties  were  present,  unless  the  party,  who  alleges  absence,  makes 
it  evident  by  the  most  manifest  proofs  either  in  writing  or  by 
witnesses,  that  either  he,  or  his  adversary,  was  in  some  other 
place,  during  the  whole  day,  in  which  the  instrument  was  made. 

Of  Stipulation  as  respects  Death. 

XII.  A  man  could  formerly  no  more  stipulate,  that  a  thing 
should  be  given  him  after  his  own  death,  than  he  could  stipulate, 
that  a  thing  should  be  given  him  after  the  death  of  the  obligor. 
Neither  could  any  person  under  the  power  of  another  stipulate, 
that  any  thing  should  be  given  him  after  his  death,  because  such 


B>  ui.  T.  xx. OF  JUSTINIAN. 159 

person  would  appear  to  speak  the  words  of  his  father  or  master. 
And,  if  a  man  had  stipulated  in  this  manner,  "  do  you  promise 
to  give  me  five  aurei  the  day  before  I  die  ?"  or  "  the  day  before 
you  die  ?"  the  stipulation  was  also  invalid.  But  since  all  stipu- 
lations, as  we  have  already  said,  take  their  rise  and  force  from 
the  consent  of  the  contracting  parties,  we  have  thought  it  proper 
to  introduce  a  necessary  emendation  in  this  respect,  so  that, 
whether  it  is  stipulated  that  a  thing  should  be  given  after,  or 
immediately  before,  the  death  either  of  the  stipulates  or  the 
obligor,  the  stipulation  shall  be  good. 

Of  preposterous  Stipulation. 

XIII.  Also,  if  a  man  had  stipulated  in  these  words,  "  do  you 
promise  me  a  sum  of  money  to-day,  if  a  certain  ship  arrives  to- 
morrow from  Asia  ?"  the  stipulation  would  have  been  invalid, 
because  preposterously  conceived.     But,  since  the  emperor  Leo, 
of  renowned  memory,   was  of  opinion,  that  such  stipulations 
ought  not  to  be  rejected  in  regard  to  marriage  portions,  it  hath 
pleased  us  also  to  give  a  fuller  force  to  this  doctrine  by  ordaining, 
that  every  stipulation  of  like  import  shall  hold  good,  not  only  m 
marriage  portions,  but  likewise  in  all  other  contracts. 

Of  Stipulation  at  the  Time  of  Death. 

XIV.  If  a  stipulation  had  been  conceived  in  the  following 
words;  "  dou  you  promise  to  give  me  ten  aurei  at  the  time  whea 
I  shall  die  ?"  or  thus,  "  at  the  time  when  you  shall  die  ?"  it  was 
good  by  antient  law,  and  is  now  valid. 

XV.  We  may  also  legally  stipulate  that  a  thing  shall  be  given, 
after  the  death  of  a  third  person. 

Of  written  Promise. 

XVI.  If  it  is  written  in  an  act  or  instrument,  properly  attested, 
that  a  man  hath  entered  into  an  obligation  by  promise,  it  will  be 
always  presumed,  that  the  promise  was  in  answer  to  a  precedent 
interrogation,  and  that  every  thing  was  done  regularly. 

XVII.  When  many  things  are  comprehended  in  one  stipulation, 
a  man  binds  himself  to  give  them  all,   if  he  answers  simply, 
"  I  promise."    But,  if  he  promises  to  give  one,  or  some  of  the 
things  stipulated,  an  obligation  is  contracted  only  in  respect  to 
those  things  which  he  promised  to  give.   For,  where  there  are 
many  stipulations,  it  may  happen,  that  only  one,  or  some  of  them 
may  be  made  perfect  by  a  separate  answer ;  and  strictly  we  ought 
to  stipulate  for  every  thing  severally,  and  to  answer  severally. 

XVIII.  No  man  can  stipulate  for  another,  as  we  have  already 
observed  ;  for  stipulations  and  obligations  have  been  invented, 
that  every  person  may  acquire  for  himself  whatever  may  be  of 


.150  THE  INSTITUTES B.  in.  T.  xx, 

advantage  to  him;  and,  if  this  is  given  to  another,  the  stipulator 
has  no  interest  But,  if  a  man  would  effectually  contract  for 
Another,  he  should  stipulate,  that  unless  the  covenants  of  his  sti- 
pulation are  performed,  the  obligor  should  be  subject  to  a  penalty, 
payable  to  him,  who  otherwise  would  receive  no  advantage  from 
the  6bligation  :  for,  when  a  penalty  is  stipulated,  the  advantage 
or  interest  of  the  stipulator  is  not  regarded,  but  the  quantity  of 
the  penalty  is  the  only  thing  considered.  And  therefore,  if  a 
man  should  stipulate,  that  a  certain  thing  should  be  given  to 
Titius,  it  will  not  avail ;  but,  if  to  the  stipulation  he  adds  a 
penalty,  as  thus,  "  do  you  promise  to  give  me  ten  aurei,  if  you 
do  not  give  the  thing  stipulated  to  Titius?"  the  stipulation  of  the 
penalty  will  take  place,  if  the  obligation  is  not  performed. 

XIX.  But,  if  any  man  stipulates  for  the  benefit  of  another, 
when  he  himself  also  receives  an  advantage  from  it,  the  stipula- 
tion is  valid.    Thus  if  he,  who  hath  begun  to  administer  the  tute- 
lage of  a  pupil,  should  afterwards  cede  or  give  up  the  adminis- 
tration to  his  co-tutor,  and  stipulate  for  the  security  of  the  estate 
6f  his  pupil,  in  this  case,  (inasmuch  as  such  a  stipulation  is  for 
the  interest  of  the  stipulator,  who  would  be  obliged  to  answer  all 
damages  to  the  pupil,  if  the  co-tutor  did  not  justly  administer  the 
pupillary  trust,)  the  obligation  would  bind.    And  upon  the  same 
principle,  if  a  man  stipulates,  that  a  thing  shall  be  given  to  his 
proctor  or  attorney,  the  stipulation  shall  prevail.    And  a  stipula- 
tion is  also  good,  which  is  made  by  a  debtor  for  the  use  of  his 
creditor,  because  it  is  the  interest  of  the  debtor,  either  that  the 
penalty,  upon  which  he  borrowed  money  of  his  creditor,  should 
not  be  exacted  from  him,  or  that  his  goods,  which  are  hypothe- 
cated with  his  creditor,  should  not  be  sold. 

XX.  On  the  contrary,  he  who  promises,  that  another,  namely 
Titius,  shall  perform  some  particular  act,  is  not  bound  by  such 
promise,  unless  he  makes  himself  subject  to  a  penalty,  if  the  act 
is  not  performed  by  Titius. 

XXI.  No  man  can  legally  stipulate,  that  a  thing  shall  be  given 
him,  when  it  shall  become  his  own. 

XXII.  If  the  stipulator  stipulates  in  regard  to  one  thing,  and 
the  obligor  promises  in  relation  to  another,  no  obligation  i»  con- 
tracted ;  and  the  parties  are  as  much  at  liberty,  as  if  BO  answer 
had  been  made  to  the  interrogation :  and  this  would  be  the  case, 
if  a  man  should  stipulate,  that  Stichus  should  be  given  to  him, 
and  the  obligor  should  intend  to  give  Pamphilus,  upon  a  thoroagh 
persuasion,  that  Pamphilus  is  called  Stichus. 


B.  in.  T.  xx.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


XXIII.  A  promise   made  for  a  dishonest  purpose,  as,  for  ex- 
ample, to  commit  homicide  or  sacrilege,  is  not  binding. 

XXIV.  If  a  stipulation  hath  been  entered  into  upon  condition, 
and  the  stipulator  should  die  pending  the  event  of  it,  his  heir  will 
be  entitled  to  an  action  against  the  obligor,  if  the  event  afterwards 
happens.     And,  if  the  obligor  should  die  before  the   condition 
happens,  his  heir  may  be  sued  by  the  stipulator. 

XXV.  Whoever  stipulates,  that  a  thing  shall  be  given  to  him 
this  year  or  this  month,  cannot  legally  sue  the  obligor,  till  the 
whole  year  or  month  is  elapsed.    And,  if  a  man  stipulates,  that  a 
piece  of  ground,  or  slave,  shall  be  given  to  him,  he  cannot  in- 
stantly sue  the  obligor,  but  must  wait,  till  such  a  space  of  time 
hath  past,  in  which  a  delivery  might  reasonably  have  been  made. 

TITLE  XXI. 

OF  SURETIES. 

IT  frequently  happens,  that  others  bind  themselves  for  him 
who  promises.  These  bondsmen  or  sureties  are  called  fide-jussors, 
and  are  generally  required  by  creditors  for  their  greater  security. 

Where  required. 

I.  Fide-jussors  may  be  received  in  all  obligations,  whether  con- 
tracted by  the  delivery  of  the  thing  itself,  by  words,  by  writing, 
or  the  mere  consent  of  parties  :   nor  is  it  material,  whether  the 
obligation  is  civil  or  natural;  fora  man  may  intervene,  and  oblige 
himself,  as  ^fide-jussor  or  surety,  even  on  the  behalf  of  a  slave  ; 
and  this  may  be  done,  whether  the  person  who  accepts  the  fide* 
jussor  is  a  strangeror  the  master  of  the  slave,  when  the  thing  due 
is  a  natural  debt  or  obligation. 

Of  the  Heir. 

II.  Afide-jussor  is  not  only  bound  himself,  but  by  his  death 
transmits  the  obligation  to  his  heir. 

III.  A  fide-jussor  may  be  accepted  either  before  or  after  an 
obligation  is  entered  into. 

Where  there  are  more  Fide-Jussors. 

IV.  Where  there  are  fide-jussors  or  sureties,  let  them  be  ever 
so  numerous,  they  are  each  bound  by  law  in  solidum,  i.  e.  for  the 
whole  debt ;  and   the  creditor  is  at  liberty  to  chuse  from  whom 
he  will  demand  it.     But,  by  a  rescript  of  the  emperor  Adrian,  a 
creditor  may  be  obliged  to  demand  separately  from  every  fide" 
jussor,  who  is  solvent  at  the  time  of  contestation  of  suit,  his  share 
of  the  debt  pro  rata ;  and,  if  any  of  the  fide-jussors,  at  the  time  of 

Vox,.  1.  No.  6,  X 


* 

THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  xxi, 

the  contestation  of  the  suit,  is  not  solvent,  the  burden  falls  upon 
the  rest.  But,  if  a  creditor  obtains  his  whole  demand  from  one 
of  thejide-jussors,  the  whole  loss  shall  be  his,  if  the  party  prin- 
cipal, for  whom  he  was  bound,  is  insolvent:  for  such  Jide-jussor 
can  impute  this  loss  only  to  himself,  since  he  might  have  called  to 
bis  aid  the  rescript  of  the  emperor  Adrian,  and  have  prayed,  that 
an  action  should  not  have  been  given  against  him,  obliging  him  to 
the  payment  of  more  than  his  share  of  the  debt,  as  a  surety.  ?ifjt 
The  Duty  of  the  Fide-Jussor. 

V.  Fide-jussors  ought  not  to  be  bound  in  a  greater  sum  than 
the  debtor  owes,  for  whom  they  are  bound;  for  their  obligation 
is  an  accession  to  the  principal  obligation  ;  and  an  accessary  debt 
cannot   be   greater  than  the  principal,  though  it   may  be  less. 
Therefore,  if  the  principal   obligor   promises  ten  aurei,  thejide- 
jussor  may  be  bound  in  five  ;  but  the  Jide-jussor  cannot  be  bound 

in  ten  rurei,  when  the  principal  obligor  is  bound  in  only  five. 
Also,  when  the  obligor  promises  simply,  the  surety  may  promise 
conditionally  ;  but,  if  the  surety  is  bound  simply,  when  the  prin- 
cipal debtor  is  bound  only  conditionally,  the  obligation  is  void. 
And  the  terms  greater  and  less  take  place  not  only  in  quantity 
but  also  in  time;  for  an  obligation  to  give  or  deliver  a  thing  in- 
stantly is  greater,  than  an  obligation  to  give  or  deliver  it  after 
a  time. 

Of  the  Action  of  a  Fide-Jussor. 

VI.  If  a  fide-jussor   hath   been  obliged  to  pay  money  for  the 
person  for  whom  he  was  bound,  the  jide-jussor  may  have  an  ac- 
tion of  mandate  against  him  for  the  recovery  of  the  sum  paid. 

VII.  A.  Jide-jussor  may  thus  bind  himself  even  in  greek  ;  7-7  tyrj 
TTiorEi  K£\£vw9  \iyo,  that  is,  /  answer  or,  speak  solemnly  upon  my  faith. 
But,  if  a  man  should  use  the  words.  &yo  or  /3«\o^a«,  I  am  willing, 
or  typi,  I  promise,  any  of  these  would  serve  the  same  purpose, 

as  KI\EVU  or  Af-yc. 

VIII.  We  must  here  observe,  that  it  is  a  general  rule  in  all 
fide-jussorial  stipulations,  that  whatever  is  alleged  in  writing  to 
have  been  done,  is  to  be  presumed  to  have  been  actually  done : 
and  therefore,  if  a  man  in  writing  confesses,  that  he  hath  made 
himself  a  jide-jussor,  it  is  also  presumed,  that  all  the  necessary 
forms  were  observed. 


B.  in.  T.  xxu.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  163 


TITLE  XXII. 

OF  WRITTEN  OBLIGATIONS. 

'  A'speciesof  written  obligation  anciently  prevailed,  which  was 
effected  by  registering  the  names  of  the  contractors  ;  but  these 
contracts,  which  were  called  nomina,  are  not  now  in  use.  But,  if 
a  man  confesses  in  writing,  that  he  owes,  what  in  reality  he  never 
received,  he  cannot,  when  an  action  is  brought  against  him  for 
this  confessed  debt,  oppose  an  exception  to  it,  setting  forth,  that 
the  money  was  never  paid;  if  much  time  has  elapsed  after  the  date 
of  the  obligation,  and  the  limitation  of  this  time  has  frequently 
been  prescribed  by  the  constitutions.  Hence  it  is,  at  this  day, 
that  a  man  must  be  bound  by  his  written  note,  if  he  cannot 
legally  bring  an  exception  ;  and  from  this  written  contract  arises 
an  action  called  a  conduction,  when  no  stipulation  or  verbal  obli- 
gation can  be  proved.  And  formerly  the  imperial  constitutions 
gave  a  large  space  of  time,  not  less  than  five  years,  in  which  any 
man  was  allowed  to  bring  an  exception,  pecunice  non  numerate?, 
i.  e.  an  exception  of  money  not  paid.  But  we,  for  the  safety  of 
creditors  in  general,  have  greatly  contracted  this  allowance  of 
time,  by  our  imperial  constitution,  which  ordains,  that  an  excep- 
tion shall  not  be  brought  after  the  expiration  of  two  years. 

TITLE  XXIIL 
OF  OBLIGATIONS  BY  CONSENT. 

OBLIGATIONS  are  made  by  consent  in  buying,  selling  .letting, 
hiring,  societies  or  partnerships,  and  mandates.  And  an  abliga- 
tion,  entered  into  by  any  of  those  means,  is  said  to  be  contracted 
by  consent;  because  neither  writing  nor  the  presence  of  parties 
is  absolutely  requisite.  Neither  is  it  necessary,  that  any  thing 
should  be  given  or  delivered,  to  the  intent,  that  the  obligation 
should  take  effect ;  for  it  suffices,  that  the  contractors  consent ; 
and,  for  this  reason,  these  contracts  may  be  entered  into  by  absent 
parties,  either  by  letters  or  messengers.  And  note  also,  that,  in 
these  contracts  by  consent,  the  parties  are  bound  to  each  other 
mutually  to  do  what  is  just  and  right;  but  in  verbal  obligations 
one  party  stipulates  and  the  other  promises. 


TITLE  XXIV. 
OF  BUYING  AND  SELLING. 

THE  contract  of  buying  and  selling  is  made  perfect,  as  scon  as 
the  price  of  the  thing  to  be  sold  is  agreed  upon,  although  it  is  not 


164  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  in.  T.  xxiv. 

paid  ;  nor  even  an  earnest  of  it  given  ;  for  whatever  is  taken  as 
earnest,  does  not  constitute  a  contract,  but  serves  only  for  a  proof 
of  it.  And  this  is  the  law  in  regard  to  those  bargains  and  sales, 
which  are  not  in  writing ;  for  in  such  we  have  made  no  innova- 
tion. But,  where  there  is  a  written  contract,  we  have  ordained, 
that  a  bargain  and  sale  shall  not  become  absolute,  unless  the  instru- 
ments of  sale  are  written  by  the  contracting  parties,  or  at  least 
signed  by  them,  if  written  by  others.  And,  when  the  instruments 
of  sale  are  drawn  by  a  public  notary,  the  contract  is  not  binding, 
if  any  formality  hath  been  omitted,  or  if  the  instruments  are  not 
complete  in  all  their  parts  :  for,  if  any  thing  is  omitted,  either  the 
buyer  or  seller  may  recede  from  his  agreement  without  penalty, 
if  nothing  has  been  given  in  the  name  of  earnest.  But,  if  earnest 
has  once  been  given,  then  the  buyer,  whether  the  contract  was 
written  or  unwritten,  if  he  refuses  to  fulfill  it,  loses  his  earnest, 
and  the  seller,  if  he  refuses,  is  compellable  to  restore  double  the 
value  of  the  earnest,  although  no  agreement  of  this  kind  was  ex- 
pressly made.  But  it  is  always  necessary,  that  the  price  of  tlie 
thing  to  be  sold  should  be  fixed;  for,  till  then,  there  cau  be  no 
emptio-venditio,  i.  e.  buying  and  selling.  9ffl 

Of  a  certain  or  uncertain  Price. 

I.  The  price,  as  we  have  before  observed,  ought  to  be  certain. 
And  formerly,   when  it  was  covenanted,  that  a  thing  should  be 
sold,  at  whatever  price  Titius  should  value  it,  the  ancient  lawyers 
much  doubted,  whether  such  a  sale  was  good,  or  not  good.  But  we 
have  ordained  by  our  decision,  that  as  often  as  it  is  agreed,  that  a 
thing  shall  be  sold,  at  a  price  to  be  fixed  by  a  third  person,  such 
contract  shall  be  valid  under  that  condition ;  so  that,  if  the  nomi- 
nee, or  arbitrator,  determines  the  price,  it  ought  instantly  to  be  paid 
according  to  the  determination,  and  the  thing  sold  ought  to  be 
delivered,  and  the  sale  perfected;  for  otherwise  the  buyer  may 
have  an  action  ex  empto,  i.  e.  on  account  of  the  thing  bought ;  and 
the  seller  may  have  an  action  ex  vendito,  i.  e.  on  account  of  the 
thing  sold.     But,  if  the   arbitrator  either  refuses,  or  is  unable  to 
determine  the  price,  the  sale  is  null.     And,  as  it  hath  been  our 
pleasure,  Ibat  this  shall  be  the  law  in  relation  to  sales,   it  is  but 
right,  that  the  same  law  should  prevail,  in  locations  and  conduc- 
tions, i.  e.  in  letting  and  hi  re  ing. 

Difference  of  Buijing  and  Exchange. 

II.  The  price  of  any  thing  bought  should  consist  of  cash  or 
money  told;  for  it  hath  been  much  doubted,  whether  the  price 
of  goods  can  be  said  to  be  paid,  if  any  other  thing  is  given  for 
them  than  money;  as,  for  instance,  whether  a  slave,  a  piece  of 


B,  in.  T.  xxiv*  OF  JUSTINIAN.  165 

ground,  or  a  robe,  can  be  paid,  as  the  price  of  a  thing.  The 
lawyers  SaUnus  and  Cassius  thought,  that  a  price  might  consist  of 
any  thing,  and  from  hence  it  has  been  commonly  said,  thatemp&'o- 
venditio,  or  buying  and  selling,  is  contracted  by  commutation, 
and  that  this  species  of  buying  and  selling  is  the  most  ancient. 
The  advocates  for  this  side  of  the  question  quote  Homer,  who 
relates  in  the  following  lines,  that  a  part  of  the  Grecian  army 
bought  wine  by  giving  other  things  in  exchange  for  if, ;•  Vfj  f^nnjg 

Wine  the  rest  purchas'd  at  their  proper  cost, 

.ton  -f»l  £  And  well  the  plenteous  freight  supplied  the  host  r^iol  yrt s  li 

Each  in  exchange  proportion'd  treasures  gave,  ^frfinor* 

Some  brass  or  iron,  some  an  ox  or  slave^_  «aK-<     Pope,      * 

But  the  lawyers  of  another  sect  maintained  the  contrary,  and 
declared,  that  commutation  was  one  thing,  and  emptio-venditio 
another;  for  otherwise  said  they,  in  the  commutation  of  any  two 
things  it  can  never  appear,  which  has  been  sold,  and  which  has 
been  given,  as  the  price  of  the  thing  sold ;  and  it  is  contrary  to  rea- 
son, that  each  should  appear  to  have  been  sold,  and  that  each  also 
should  appear  to  have  been  given,  as  the  price  of  the  other.  And 
the  opinion  of  Proculus,  who  maintained,  that  commutation  ta4 
species  of  contract,  separate  from  vendition,  hath  deservedly  pre- 
vailed: for  he  is  supported  by  other  verses  from  Homer,  and  ba* 
inforced  his  opinion  with  the  strongest  arguments;  and  this  is  the 
doctrine,  which  our  predecessors,  the  emperors  Dioclesian  and 
Maximian,  have  admitted,  as  it  appears  more  at  large  in  our 
digests. 

Of  the  Risque  of  the  Thing  sold. 

III.  When  emption  and  vendition  are  once  contracted,  (and 
this,  as  we  have  observed,  is  effected,  as  soon  as  the  price  is 
agreed  upon,  when  there  is  no  covenant  in  writing,)  then  the  buyer 
is  liable  to  the  risque  of  the  loss  of  the  thing  sold,  or  of  the  da- 
mage, which  may  happen  to  it,  although  it  hath  not  been  deli- 
vered to  him.  And  therefore,  if  a  slave,  thus  sold,  should  die,  or 
receive  any  hurt,  or  if  a  building,  or  part  of  it,  should  be  con- 
sumed by  fire,  or  if  the  lands  sold,  or  any  portion  of  them  should 
be  washed  away  by  a  torrent,  or  be  made  worse  by  an  inunda- 
tion, or  a  storm,  which  may  destroy  the  trees,  the  loss  in  all  these 
cases  must  be  sustained  by  the  buyer,  who  is  obliged  to  pay  the 
price  agreed  upon,  although  he  never  had  possession  of  the  thing; 
for  whatever  the  accident  is,  if  it  happens  neither  by  the  fraud, 
nor  the  fault  of  the  seller,  he  his  secure.  But  on  the  other  hand, 
if,  after  the  sale,  any  accession  is  made  to  the  lands  by  alluvion  or 
otherwise,  this  increase  becomes  the  gain  of  the  buyer;  for.it  is 


166  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  nr.  r.xxr. 


just,  that  he  should  receive  the  profit,  who  must  have  sustained 
the  loss.  But,  if  a  slave,  who  is  sold,  either  runs  away  or  is 
stolen,  and  neither  fraud  nor  negligence  can  be  imputed  to  the 
seller,  it  must  be  inquired,  whether  the  seller  undertook  the  safe 
custody  of  the  slave,  till  delivery  should  be  made;  if  he  did,  he 
is  answerable  for  the  accident ;  if  he  did  not,  he  is  secure.  The 
same  law  takes  place  in  regard  to  all  other  animals  and  things* 
But  when  these  accidents  happen,  and  the  buyer  is  to  sustain  the 
loss,  the  seller  is  obliged  to  make  over  his  right  of  vindication 
and  condiction ;  that  is,  he  must  transfer  to  the  buyer  all  right  of 
action,  whether  real  or  personal,  if  necessary  ;  for  he  who  has  not 
delivered  the  thing  sold,  is  still  considered  as  the  proprietor  of  it. 
Actions  also  of  theft,  or  damage  done,  must  be  transferred  by  the 
seller  to  the  buyer,  when  the  thing  sold  is  stolen,  or  damaged, 

before  delivery. 

Of  Conditional  Buying. 

IV.  A  sale  maybe  contracted  conditionally,  as  well  as  purely ; 
for  instance,  when  the  person,  who  is  inclined  to  sell,  speaks  thus; 
if  within  a  certain  time  you  shall  approve  of  the  slave  Stichua, 
he  shall  be  yours  for  so  many  aurei. 

Of  the  Buying  of  a  thing  not  in  Commerce. 

V.  Whoever  knowingly  purchases  a  place  sacred,  or  religious, 
or  a  public  place,  such  as  a  forum  or  court  of  justice,  he  makes 
a  void  purchase.     But,  if  a  man  should  purchase  any  of  the  before- 
mentioned  places,  having  taken  them  for  profane  or  private,  being 
imposed  upon  by  the  seller,  then  such  purchaser,  not  being  able 
to  enjoy  the  possession   of  what  he  has  bought,  may  have  an 
action  ex  empto  against  the  seller,  and  recover  the  damage  suffered 
by  the  deceit.   The  same  law  also  obtains,  if  any  person,  through 
error,  should  buy  a  freeman  instead  of  a  slave. 

TITLE  XXV. 
OF  LETTING  AND  HIRING. 

LOCATION  and  conduction,  i.  e.  letting  and  hiring,  are  nearly 
allied  to  emption  and  vendition,  i.  e.  to  buying  and  selling  ;  and 
are  governed  by  the  same  rules ;  for  as  emption  and  vendition  are 
contracted  as  soon  as  the  price  of  the  thing  is  agreed  upon,  so  lo- 
cation and  conduction  are  contracted  when  the  hire  is  once  fixed 
by  the  parties.  The  locator,  or  person  who  lets,  is  entitled  to 
an  action,  called  actio  locati,  if  he  is  aggrieved  by  the  conductor 
or  hirer ;  and  the  conductor  may  have  an  action  called  actio  con- 
ducti,  against  the  locator. 

I.  We  are  willing,  that  what  we  have  before  observed  in  re- 
gard to  the  sale  of  a  thing,  when  the  price  is  referred  to  a  third 


*  IIU-T.  xxv.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 16? 

person,  should  also  be  understood  to  have  been  said  of  location 
and  conduction,  when  the  quantity  of  the  hire  is  not  agreed  upon 
between  the  parties,  but  left  to  arbitration.  And  therefore,  if  a 
man  sends  his  cloaths  to  a. fuller  to  be  scoured,  or  to  a  taylor  to 
he  Bended,, and  does  not  previously  agree  upon  any  price,  in  this 
case  location  and  conduction  are  not  understood  to  be  properly 
Contracted ;  but  an  action  may  be  brought  by  either  party,  prce- 
scciptis  verbis,  i.  e.  in  words  prescribed  and  adapted  to  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  case.  , ,, t  ^u fn  :>u  ^  -Mte ,*»> 
In  ichat  Location  and  Conduction  exist. 

II.  As  it  was  formerly  a  question,  whether  emption  and  ven- 
dition 'could  be  contracted  by  an  exchange  of  things,  so  it  hath 
also  been  doubted,  whether  location  and  conduction  can  be  said  to 
exist,  when  one  man  lends  another  a  particular  thing  for  his  use, 
and  receives  in  return  some  other  thing,  of  which  he  is  also  per- 
mitted to  have  the  use ;  and  it  has  been  determined,  that  this  ex- 
change does  not  constitute  location  and  conduction,  but  is  a  dis- 
tinct species  of  contract :  for  example,  if  two  neighbours  have 
each  of  them  an  ox,  and  each  agrees  to  lend  his. ox  to  the  other 
alternately  for  ten  days,  to  do  the  labours  of  the  field,  and  the  ox 
of  the  one  dies  in  the  possession  of  the  other,  in  this  case,  he,  who 
has  lost  his  ox,  can  neither  bring  the  action  locati  nor  conduct^ 
nor  even  the  action  commodati ;  for  the  ox  was  not  lent  gratui- 
tously ;  but  he  may  sue  by  virtue  of  an  action  called  prcescriptis 
verbis;  i.e.  by  an  action  upon  the  case. 
Of  Empliyteusis. 

ITL  The  contract  of  buying  and  selling,  and  that  of  letting  and 
hiring,  are  so  nearly  connected,  that,  in  some  cases,  it  has  been 
difficult  to  distinguish  the  one  from  the  other  ;  as  when  lands 
have  been  demised  to  be  enjoyed  for  ever,  upon  condition,  that, 
if  a  certain  yearly  pension,  or  rent,  is  constantly  paid  to  the  pro- 
prietor, it  shall  not  be  in  his  power  to  take  these  lands  from  the 
tenant  or  his  heirs,  or  from  any  other  person,  to  whom  such 
tenant  or  his  heirs  shall  have  sold  them,  given  them  gratuitously, 
or  as  a  marriage  portion,  or  otherwise  disposed  of  them.  But, 
when  this  contract,  concerning  which  the  ancient  lawyers  had 
great  doubts,  was  by  some  thought  to  be  an  emption  and  veu- 
dition,  and  by  others  a  location  and  conduction,  the  Zenonian 
law  was  enacted,  which  settled  the  proper  nature  of  an  emphy- 
teusis,  making  it  to  be  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  of  the  before- 
mentioned  contracts,  but  declaring  it  to  be  supported  by  its  own 
peculiar  covenants,  and  ordaining,  that  whatever  is  agreed  upon 
by  the  parties  shall  obtain  and  take  place,  as  a  contract ;  and 


163 THE  INSTITUTES.  B.  in.  T.  xxr. 

TV  hen  there  is  no  covenant,  which  declares  upon  whom  the  loss 
of  the  lands  shall  fall,  that  then,  if  the  whole  estate  happens  to- 
be  destroyed  by  a  torrent,  an  earthquake,  or  any  other  means, 
the  proprietor  must  be  the  sufferer:  but,  if  a  part  only  is  de- 
stroyed, that  the  loss  shall  then  be  borne  by  the  tenant ;  and  this 
is  the  law  in  use. 

IV.  Also,  ifTitius,  for  example,  should  agree  with  a  gold- 
smith to  make  a  certain  number  of  rings,  of  a  particular  size  and 
weight,  and  to  furnish  the  gold,  for  which  Titius  should  promise 
him  ten  aurei,  as  the  value  both  of  the  workmanship  and  the 
gold,  it  hath  been  a  question,  whether  such  a  contract  would  be 
a  buying  and  selling,  or  a  letting  and  hiring.      Cassius  was  of 
opinion,  that  it  would  be  a  buying  and  selling  in  regard  to  the 
matter,  and  a  letting  and  hiring  in  regard  to  the  work  ;  but  it  is 
now  settled,  that,  in  this  case,  an  emption  and  vendition  would 
only  be  contracted.    But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  to  be 
doubted,  that,  if  Titius  should  give  his  own  gold,  and  agree  to 
pay  only  for  the  workmanship,  this  contract  would  be  a  location 
and  conduction. 

Of  the  Obligations  of  the  Hirer. 

V.  The  conductor,  or  hirer,  is  not  only  obliged  to  observe 
strictly  the  covenants  of  the  conduction,  but  is  also  bound  in 
equity  to  perform  whatever  hath  been  omitted  to  be  inserted. 
And  whoever  has  given  or  promised  hire  for  the  use  of  cloaths, 
silver,  horses,  &c.   is  bound  to  take  the  same  care  of  them  as  the 
most  diligent  master  of  a  family  would  take  of  his  own  property. 
But,  if  the  hirer  does  this,  and  yet  loses  the  things  hired  by  some 
fortuitous  event,  he  shall  not  be  answerable  for  the  loss. 

Of  the  Death  of  the  Hirer. 

VI.  If  the  conductor,  or  hirer,  dies  before  the  time  of  the  con- 
duction is  expired,  his  heir  succeeds  to  his  right,  and  is  intitled 
to  the  thing  hired,  for  the  remainder  of  the  term. 


TITLE  XXVI. 

OF  PARTNERSHIP. 

Division  of  the  Subject  Matter. 

IT  is  common  for  persons  to  enter  either  into  a  general  partner- 
ship or  society  of  all  their  goods,  and  this  the  greeks  emphatically 
call,  Kotvwiav,  i.  e.  communion  ;  or  into  a  particular  partnership, 
which  regards  only  some  single  species  of  commerce,  as  that  of 
buying  and  selling  slaves,  oil,  wine,  or  corn. 


fe.  in.  T.  xxvi.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


Of  the  Shares  of  Loss  and  Gain. 

I.  If  no  express  agreement  has  been  made  by  the  partners 
concerning  their  shares  of  profit  and  loss  ;  the  loss  must  be  equally 
borne,  and  tfre  profit  must  be  equally  divided.     But,  if  any  parti- 
cular agreement  has  been  made,  it  must  be  observed  ;    for  it  was 
never  yet  doubted,  but  that  the  covenant  would  be  binding,  if  two 
persons  should  agree,  that  two  shares  of  the  profit  and  loss  should 
belong  to  one  partner,  and  that  only  the  third  part  of  both  should: 

belong  to  the  other. 

0  WtftW  ,/nog  -»iij  d*S0lu)t  $*  *>*»/>  **n&»#r 

srfj  bflii  qidsnsaiiho     Q/"  unequal  Shares. 

II.  But  it  has  been  questioned,  if  Titius  and  Seius  should  cove- 
nant between  themselves,  that  Titius  should  receive  two  parts  of 
the  profit  and  bear  but  a  third  of  the  loss,  and  that  Seius  should 
bear  two  parts  of  the  loss,  and  receive  but  a  third  share  of  the 
profit,  whether  such  an  agreement  would  be  binding  ?   Quintus 
Mutius  was  of  opinion,  that  such  a  covenant  was  contrary  to  the 
nature  of  partnership,  and  ought  not  therefore  to  be  ratified;  but 
Servius  Sulpicius,  whose  opinion  hath  prevailed,  thought  other- 
wise, and  for  this  reason  ;  because  the  labour  of  some  is  so  highly 
valuable,  that  it  is  but  just^  that  they  should  be  admitted  into 
society  upon  the  most  advantageous  conditions,  for  no  man  doubts, 
but  that  partnership  may  be  entered  into  by  two  persons,  when 
one  of  them  only  finds  money,  inasmuch  as  it  often  happens,  that 
the  work,  and  labour  of  the  other,  amounts  to  the  value  of  it,  and 
supplies  its  place.     And  also,  contrary  to  the  opinion  of  Mutius, 
it  hath  obtained  as  law,  that  a  partner  may  by  agreement  take  a 
share  of  the  profit,  and  not  be  accountable  for  any  part  of  the 
loss  ;    for  Servius  thought,  that   this  likewise  might   be   done 
equitably  :  but  it  must  be  so  understood,  that,  if  profit  accrues 
from  one  species  of  things  and  loss  from  another,  only  what 
remains,  after  the  loss  is   compensated,  shall   be  looked  upon 
as  profit. 

_  __   _      _  221.      Of  Shares  expressed. 

III.  It  is  also  a  settled  point,  that,  if  partners  expressly  mention 
their  shares  in  one  respect  only,  either  solely  in  regard  to  gain,  or 
solely  in  regard  to  loss,  their  shares  of  that,  which  is  omitted, 
shall  be  the  same  as  of  that,  which  is  mentioned. 

>?9fi4ij  M°w  Partnership  is  dissolved.—  Renunciation 

IV.  A  partnership  lasts  as  Jong  as  the  partners  persevere  in 
their  consent  to  continue  such;    and,  if  one  of  them   renounces 

,  the  partnership,  the  society  is  dissolved.     But,  if  a  man  renounces 
with  a  fraudulent  intent,  and  for  no  other  end,  but  that  he  may 
VOL.  I.  No.  6.  Y 


170 THE  INSTITUTES B.IH, 

enjoy  the  sole  benefit  of  some  future  fortune,  which  he  expects, 
his  renunciation  will  not  avail:  for,  if  a  partner  in  common,  as 
soon  as  he  finds,  that  he  has  been  appointed  an  heir,  should 
renounce  his  partnership,  that  he  may  possess  the  inheritance 
exclusive  of  all  others,  he  would  nevertheless  be  compelled  to 
divide  the  inheritance  equally  with  his  former  partners;  yet,  if 
an  inheritance,  which  he  did  not  expect,  should  by  accident  fall 
to  him  after  renunciation,  the  whole  would  be  his  own  :  but  those, 
from  whom  a  partner  hath  separated  himself  by  renouncing,  pos- 
sess solely  for  themselves  whatever  they  acquire,  after  the 
renunciation  of  that  partner. 

Of  Death. 

V.  A  partnership  is  also  dissolved  by  the  death  of  one  of  the 
partners:  for  he,  who  enters  into  partnership  always  chusessome 
certain  known  person  to  be  his  partner,  upon  whom  he  can  de- 
pend.   And,  although  a  partnership  is  entered  into  by  the  consent 
of  many,  it  is  nevertheless  dissolved  by  the  death  of  one,  although 
the  rest  survive;  and  this  is  the  law,  unless  special  covenants  are 
made  to  the  contrary  at  the  time  of  forming  the  society. 

The  Termination  of  the  Object. 

VI.  Also,  if  a  partnership  is  entered  into  on  account  of  some 
particular  commerce,  and  an  end  is  put  to  that  commerce,  the 
partnership  is  of  course  ended. 

Of  Confiscation. 

VII.  It  is  likewise  manifest,  that  a  partnership  is  dissolved  by 
confiscation  ;  to  wit,  if  all  the  goods  of  a  partner  are  confiscated; 
for  when  another  (for  example,  the  treasurer  of  the  exchequer), 
succeeds  in  his  place,  he  is  reputed  as  civilly  dead. 

Of  the  Cession  of  Goods. 

VIII.  Also,  if  a  man  in  partnership,  being  pressed  by  his  debts, 
makes  a  cession  or  a  surrender  of  his  goods,  and  they  are  sold  to 
satisfy  either  public  or  private  demands,  the  partnership  is  dis- 
solved. But,  if  the  rest  of  the  copartners  should  still  desire  to  be  in 
society  either  with  or  without  this  man,  the  first  partnership 
would  not  continue,  but  a  new  one  would  commence. 

Of  Fraud  and  Negligence. 

IX.  It  has  been  a  question,  whether  a  partner,  like  a  depositary, 
is  accountable  for  fraud  only,  or  whether  he  is  also  accountable  for 
his  negligence  ?  And  it  now   prevails,  that  he  is  answerable  for 
all  the  damages,  which  happen  through  his  fault.     And,  if  a 
man  fails  in  having  used  the  most  exact  diligence,  such  a  failure 
is  not  comprehended  under  the  term  culpa,  or  fault :  for  a  partner 


T.  xxvi.          OF  JUSTINIAN.  171 

is  not  liable  to  answer  damages,  if,  in  regard  to  the  goods  of  the 
community,  it  appears,  that  he  has  used  the  same  care  and  dili- 
gence towards  them,  wtyich  he  has  usually  observed  in  keeping 
his  own  private  property.  And  it  is  certain,  that  whoever  chuses 
a  negligent  man  for  his  partner,  can  lay  the  blame  upon  himself 
only  and  impute  his  misfortune  to  his  own  ill  choice. 


TITLE  XXVII. 
OF  MANDATE. 

A  mandate  is  framed  five  ways  j  either  when  it  is  given  solely 
for  the  benefit  of  the  mandator  ;  or  partly  for  his  benefit,  and  partly 
for  that  of  the  mandatary  ;  or  solely  for  the  service  of  some  third 
person;  or  partly  for  the  profit  of  the  mandator  and  partly  for  the 
service  of  a  third  person  ;  or  for  the  benefit  of  the  mandator,  and 
partly  for  the  use  of  a  third  person.  But,  if  a  mandate  is  given 
solely  for  the  sake  of  the  mandatary,  the  mandate  is  useless  :  fof' 
no  obligation  can  arise  from  it,  nor  of  course  any  action. 


When  a  Mandate  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  Mandator. 

I.  A  mandate  is  given  solely  for  the  benefit  of  the  mandator, 
when  he  requires  the  mandatary  to  transact  his  business,  to  buy 
lands,  or  to  become  a  surety  for  him. 

Of  the  fifandatary. 

II.  A  mandate  is  given  partly  for  the  benefit  of  the  mandator, 
and  partly  for  the  benefit  of  the  mandatary,  if  the  mandator  re- 
quires you  to  lend  money  upon  interest  to  Titius,  who  would  bor- 
row it  for  the  use  of  the  mandator;  or  if,  when  you  are  upon  the 
point  of  suing  a  man  on  account  of  a  fide-jussory  caution,  or  a 
suretyship,  he  should  authorise  you  at  his  own  risque  to  sue  the 
principal  debtor;  or  if  he  should  impower  you  at  his  own  hazard 
to  stipulate  for  the  sum,  which  he  owes  you,  from  some  other 
person,  whom  he  appoints. 

,    A  Mandate  for  the  Use  of  a  third  Person. 

III.  A  mandate  is  interposed  only  for  the  sake  of  a  third  per- 
son, when  the  mandator  requires  the  mandatary  to  perform  some 
office  for  Titius,  to  buy  lands  for  him,  or  to  become  his  bail. 

For  the  Use  of  the  Mandatary  and  Another* 

IV.  A  mandate  tends  to  the  benefit  of  the  mandator,  and  also 
of  a  third  person,  when  the  mandator  requires  you,,  who  are  the 
mandatary,  to  transact  some  affair  for  the  common  benefit  of  both 
him  and  Titius,  or  to  buy  lands  for  them  both,  o/  to  be  bound 
for  them. 


172  THE  INSTITUTES  ,  B.  in. 

Of  the  Mandatary  and  Another. 

V.  A  mandate  is  given  in  favour  of  the  mandatary  and  of  a 
third  person,  when  the  mandator  requires  you  to  lend  money  to 
Titius,  upon  interest;  but  if  you  are  required  to  lend  money  with- 
out interest,  the  mandate  can  only  be  in  favour  of  him,  to  whom 
it  is  lent. 

VI.  A  mandate  is  given  solely  for  your  own  benefit,  if  the 
mandator  requires  you  rather  to  make  a  purchase  of  lands  than 
to  lend  your  money  upon  interest ;  or,  on  the  contrary,  rather  to 
lend  your  money  upon  interest  than  to  buy  lands.     But  a  man- 
date of  this  species  seems  rather  to  be  good  advice  than  a  man- 
date ;  and  is  therefore  not  obligatory ;  for  an  action  of  mandate 
cannot  be  brought  against  a  man  on  account  of  the  advice  which 
be  has  given,  although  it  has  not  proved  beneficial  to  him  to 
whom  it  was  given  ;  inasmuch  as  every  one  is  at  full  liberty  to 
consult  his  own  reason,  whether  the  counsel  given  to  him  is  ex- 
pedient or  not.     And  therefore,  if  you  should  be  obliged  to  em- 
ploy your  money,  which  now  lies  dead,  either  by  lending  it  out 
at  interest,  or  in  making  a  purchase,  and  you  shall  become  a  loser 
by  following  tli is  advice,  the  adviser  would  not  be  liable  to  an 
action.    And  this  is  so  true,  that  it  has  even  been  a  question, 
whether  an  action  of  mandate  will  lie  against  him  who  hath  re- 
quired you  by  mandate  to  lend  money  to  Titius,  who  is  insolvent. 
But  the  opinion  of  Sabinus  hath  obtained,  and  a  mandate  in  this 
case  is  now  judged   to  be  obligatory  ;  for  you  would  never  have 
trusted  Titius  but  in  obedience  to  the  mandate. 

VII.  A  mandate  contrary  to  good  manners  is  not  obligatory :  as 
if  Titius  should  command  Sempronius  to  commit  theft,  or  to  do 
some  act  to  the  damage  or  injury  of  a  third  person ;  for,  although 
Sempronius  should  suffer  a  penalty  or  punishment  in  consequence 
of  his  obedience  to  such  a  mandate,  he  "will  not  be  intitled  to  any 
action  against  Titius. 

Of  the  Execution  of  a  Mandate. 

VIII.  He  who  executes  a  mandate  ought  not  to  exceed  the 
bounds^ of  it;  for  example,  if  a  mandator  should  require  you 
to  purchase  lands,  or  to  be  bound  for  Titius,  to  the  amount  of  an 
hundred  aurei,  you  ought  not  to  buy  the  lands  at  an  higher  price, 
or  be  bound  for  Titius  in  a  greater  sum:  for,  if  you  exceed  the 
mandate,  you  will  not  be  intitled  to  an  action  for  the  recovery  of 
the  excess.    Aod  Cassius  and  Sabinus  were  even  of  opinion,  that, 
although  you  were  willing  to  bring  an  action  of  mandate  for  no 
more  than  the  hundred  aurei,  you  could  not  recover  them.    But 
it  was  held  by  the  lawyers  of  a  different  school,  that  the  manda- 


•r.xxvn.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  173 

tary  might  sue  the  mandator  for  the  hundred  aurei:  and  this  ap~ 
pears  to  be  the  more  equitable  opinion.  But,  if  you  buy  certain 
lands  at  a  less  price  than  that  which  the  mandator  has  allowed, 
you  will  undoubtedly  be  intitled  to  an  action  of  mandate:  for  if 
he  hath  ordered  that  an  hundred  aurei  shall  be  expended  in  the 
purchase  of  a  particular  estate,  he  will  certainly  be  understood  to 
have,  ordered,  that  the  same  estate  should,  if  possible,  be  pur- 
chased at  a  less  price, 

Of  the  Revocation  of  a  Mandate. 

IX.  A  mandate,  properly  contracted,  becomes  null,  if  it  is  re- 
voked whilst  intire;  that  is,  before  any  act  hath  been  done  in  con- 
sequence of  it. 

Of  Death. 

X  A  mandate  also  becomes  null,  if  either  the  mandator  or  the 
mandatary  dies  whilst  it  continues  intire.  But  it  is  allowed,  for 
the  benefit  of  society,  that,  if  a  mandator  dies,  and  the  manda- 
tary, not  knowing  of  his  death,  should  afterwards  execute  the 
mandate,  he  may  bring  his  action  against  the  heirs  of  the  man- 
dator: for  otherwise  an  unblameable  and  undoubted  want  of 
knowledge  wpuld  be  prejudicial;  and,  in  a  similar  case,  it  hath 
been  determined,  that,  if  the  debtors  of  Titius,  whose  steward  has 
been  manumitted,  should,  without  knowledge  of  the  manumis- 
sion, pay  this  freed-man  what  was  due  to  Titius,  they  would  be 
cleared  from  their  debt,  and  the  payment  would  be  good ;  al- 
though, by  the  rigour  of  the  law,  it  would  be  otherwise;  since 
they  had  made  their  payment  to  another  than  him,  to  whom 
it  ought  to  have  been  made. 

Of  Renunciation. 

XI.  Every  man  is  at  liberty  to  refuse  a  mandate;  but,  if  it  is 
once  accepted,  it  must  be  performed,   or  renounced,  as  soon  as 
possible,  that  the  mandator  may  transact  the  business  himself,  or 
by  another.     But,  if  the  renunciation  is  made  so  late,   that  the 
mandator  can  have  no  opportunity  of  transacting  this  business 
properly,  an  action  will  lie  against  the  mandatary,  unless  he  can 
shew  some  just  cause  for  his  delay  in  not  making  a  timely  re- 
nunciation. 

Of  Time  certain  and  Condition. 

XII.  A  mandate  may  be  contracted  to  transact  a  particular 
business  at  a  distant  day,  or  upon  condition. 

Of  Hire. 

XIII.  In  fine,  it  must  be  observed,  that  if  a  mandate  is  not  gra- 
tuitous, it  then  becomes  another  species  of  contract :  for  if  a  price 
is  agreed  upon,  the  contract  of  location  and  conduction  com- 


174 THE  INSTITUTES B.  m, 

mences ;  and,  in  general,  when  a  trust,  or  business,  is  undertaken 
without  hire,  the  contract  regards  either  a  mandate  or  a  deposit; 
but,  when  there  is  an  agreement  for  hire,  it  constitutes  location 
and  conduction.  And  therefore,  if  a  man  gives  his  cloaths  to  a 
fuller,  that  they  may  be  cleaned,  or  to  a  taylor,  that  they  may  be 
mended,  and  there  is  no  agreement  or  promise  made,  an  action  of 
mandate  will  lie. 

TITLE  XXVIII. 

• 

Of  Obligations  from  implied  (quasi)  Contracts. 

HAVING  already  enumerated  the  various  kinds  of  direct  obliga- 
tions, we  will  now  treat  of  those  which  cannot  be  said  properly  to 
arise  from  a  contract,  but  yet,  inasmuch  as  they  take  not  their 
origin  from  any  thing  criminal,  seem  tp  arise  from  an  implied^  or 
a  quasi-contract, 

Of  Agency. 

I.  When  one  person  transacts  the  business  of  another,  who  is 
absent,  they  reciprocally  obtain  a  right  to  certain  actions,  called 
actiones  negotiorum  gestorum  ;  i.  e.  actions  on  account  of  business 
done ;  and  it  is  manifest,  that  these  can  arise  from  no  proper  or 
regular  contract;  for  they  take  place  only  when  one  man  assumes 
the  care  or  affairs  of  another  without  a  mandate;  and,  in  this 
case,  those  persons  for  whom  business  is  transacted  are  always 
bound  without  their  knowledge ;  and  this  is  permitted  for  the 
public  good,  because  the  business  of  those  who  are  absent  in  a 
foreign  country,  and  have  not  committed  the  administration  of 
their  affairs  to  any  particular  person,  would  otherwise  be  totally 
neglected :  for  no  man  would  take  this  care  upon  himself,  if  he 
could  not  afterwards  bring  an  action  to  recover  what  he  had  ex- 
pended. But,  as  the  principal  is  bound  to  reimburse  the  agent,, 
who  has  negotiated  his  affairs  properly,  so  is  the  agent  bound  to 
render  a  just  account  of  his  administration  to  his  principal.  And 
an  a  agent,  in  this  case,  is  obliged  to  use  the  most  exact  diligence; 
for  it  will  not  suffice,  although  he  proves,  that  he  has  taken  the 
same  care  of  the  affairs  of  his  piincipal,  which  he  usually  took  of 
his  own,  if  it  can  by  any  means  appear  that  a  more  diligent  man 
could  have  acted  with  greater  advantage  to  his  principal. 

Of  Tutelage. 

II.  A  tutor,  although  he  is  subject  to  an  action  of  tutelage,  is 
not  reckoned  to  be  bound  by  any  pact  or  agreement ;  for  between 
a  pupil  and  his  tutor  there  is  no  express  contract.  But,  because 
tutors  are  not  subject  to  an  action  of  male-feasance,  they  are  un- 
derstood to  be  bound  by  an  implied,  or  quasi-contract ;  and  thus 
both  tutor  and  pupil  may  bring  actions  reciprocally;  the  pupil 


*k  xxvii.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  175 

may  bring  a  direct  action  of  tutelage  against  his  tutor,  and  the 
tutor,  if  he  has  expended  his  own  money  in  the  affairs  of  his  pu- 
pil, or  has  been  bound  for  him,  or  has  mortgaged  his  own  pos- 
sessions to  the  creditors,  is  intitled  to  the  action  called  contra- 
ria  tutelar 

Of  the  Community  of  a  Thing. 

III.  When  a  thing  happens  to  be  in  common  among  persons 
•who  have  never  entered  into  a  voluntary  partnership;  as  when 
the  same  field,  or  part  of  an  inheritance,  is  devised  or  given  gene- 
rally between  two;  in  this  case  the  one  may  be  called  to  answer 
the  other  by  the  action  communi  dividundo,  either  because  the  one 
hath  taken  to  his  use  the  whole  product  of  the  ground ;  or  be- 
cause the  other  hath  been  at  the  sole  expence  of  maintaining  it 
in  good  order.     But  neither  of  these  persons  can  properly  be  said 
to  be  bound  by  contract;  since  they  made  no  agreement  between 
themselves;  but,  inasmuch  as  they  are  exempt  from  any  criminal 
action,  they  are  accounted  as  bound  by  a  ^wa-M-contract. 

Of  Community  in  a  Hereditament. 

IV.  And  the  same  law  prevails  in  regard  to  him,  Who  is  bound 
to  his  co-heir  and  is  liable  to  the  action  fam ilce  erciscundce,  for 
the  partition  of  an  universal  inheritance. 

V.  An  heir  for  the  same  reason  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be 
bound  by  contract  to  a  legatary ;   for  the  legatary  can  never  be 
supposed  to  have  entered  into  any  compact  either  with  the  heir, 
or  with  the  deceased:  but,  as  the  heir  cannot  be  prosecuted  by  an 
action  of  male-feasance,  he  is  presumed   to   be  indebted  to  the 
legatary  by  a  quasi-contract. 

Of  a  mistaken  Payment. 

VI.  He,  to  whom  another  has  paid  by  mistake  what  was  not 
clue,  appears  to  be  indebted  by  quasi-contract;  for  he  is  certainly 
not  bound  by  an  express  agreement :  and,   strictly  speaking,   he 
might  rather  be  said,  (as  we  have  observed,)  to  be  bound  by  the 
dissolution  than  by  the  making  of  a  contract :  for  he,  who  paid 
the  money  with  an  intent  to  discharge  his  debts,  seemed  rather 
inclined  to   dissolve  an  engagement,  than  to  contract  one.     But 
nevertheless,  whoever  receives  money  by  the  mistake  of  another, 
is  as  much  bound  to  repay  it,  as  if  it  had  been  lent  to  him ;  and 
he  is  therefore  liable  to  an  action  of  condiction. 

Where  an  undue  Debt  (when  paid)  cannot  be  redemanded. 

VII.  In  some  cases  money  paid   by   mistake,   when  not  due, 
cannot  afterwards   be  demanded :  for  the  antient  lawyers  have 
delivered  it  as  a  maxim,  that  where  an  action  for  double  value  of 


176 THE  INSTITUTES E.  m, 

the  debt  is  given  upon  the  denial  of  it,  (as  by  the  law  Aquilia, 
and  in  the  case  of  legacies)  the  debtor,  who  has  through  error 
paid  money  to  him,  to  whom  it  was  not  due,  shall  never  recover 
it.  But  these  lawyers  would  have  this  rule  to  take  place  only  in 
regard  to  fixed  and  certain  legacies,  devised  per  damnationem. 
But  our  imperial  constitution,  which  reduced  all  legacies  and 
trusts  to  one  common  nature,  hath  caused  this  augmentation  in 
duplum  after  denial  to  be  extended  to  legacies  and  trusts  in  gene- 
ral: yet  the  privilege  of  not  refunding  what  is  paid  by  mistake  is 
by  our  constitution  only  granted  to  churches  and  other  holy  places, 
which  are  honoured  on  account  of  religion  and  piety. 

TITLE  XXIX. 
BY  WHAT  PERSONS  OBLIGATION  is  ACQUIRED. 

Of  Those  who  are  under  Power  of  Another. 
HAVING  explained  the  various  kinds  of  obligations,  which 
arise  from  contracts  or  quasi-contracts,  we  must  now  observe, 
that  we  acquire  obligations  not  only  by  means  of  ourselves,  but 
also  by  those,  who  are  under  our  power ;  as  by  our  slaves,  and  our 
children:  and  whatever  is  acquired  by  our  slaves  is  wholly  our 
own;  but  that,  which  is  acquired  by  our  children,  under  our 
power,  by  virtue  of  their  contracts,  must  be  divided  according  to 
the  decree  of  our  constitution,  which  gives  to  the  father  the  usu- 
fruct of  the  thing  gained,  but  reserves  the  property  of  it  to  the 
son.  But  a  father,  in  bringing  an  action,  must  act  in  obedience  to 
pur  novel  constitution. 

I.  We  may  also  acquire  things  by  means  of  freemen,  and  the 
slaves  of  others,   whom  we   possess  bonaf.de:  but  this  we  can 
only  do  in  two  cases ;  to  wit,  when  they  have  gained  an  acquisition 
by  their  labour,  or  by  virtue  of  something,  which  belongs  to  us. 

II.  We  may  always  acquire  in  either  of  the  above  named  cases, 
by  means  even  of  those  slaves,  of  whom  we  have  only  the  usu- 
fruct or  use. 

.  III.  It  is  certain,  that  a  slave,  who  is  in  common  between  two 
or  more,  acquires  for  his  masters,  in  proportion  to  the  property, 
which  each  of  them  has  in  him  ;  unless  he  stipulates,  or  receives 
something,  in  the  name  of  one  of  them  only ;  as  if  he  had  thus 
stipulated; "  do  you  promise  to  give  such  a  particular  thing  to 
Titi us,  my  master?"  for  although  it  was  a  doubt  in  times  past, 
whether  a  slave,  when  commanded,  could  stipulate  for  the  sole 
benefit  of  one  of  his  masters  ;  yet,  since  our  decision,  it  has  become 
a  settled  point,  (as  we  said  before,)  that  a  slave,  in  this  case,  can 
acquire  for  him  only,  who  hath  ordered  the  stipulation. 


r.  x*x.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  177 

TITLE  XXX. 
How  OBLIGATIONS  ARE  DISSOLVED. 

By  Payment. 

AN  obligation  is  dissolved  by  the  payment  of  what  is  due;  or 
by  the  payment  of  one  thing  for  another,  if  the  creditor  consents: 
neither  is  it  material,  by  whom  payment  is  made,  whether  by  the 
debtor  himself,  or  by  another  for  him ;  for  a  debtor  becomes  free 
from  his  debt,  when  another  has  paid  it,  either  with  or  without 
his  knowledge,  or  even  against  his  consent.  Also  when  a  princi- 
pal debtor  pays  his  creditors,  then  those,  who  have  been  bound  for 
him,  are  free  from  their  obligation:  and,  on  the  contrary,  when  a 
jide-jussor  or  bondsman  clears  himself  from  his  obligation  by  pay- 
ment, he  not  only  becomes  free  himself,  but  the  principal  debtor 
is  also  cleared  from  his  debt. 

By  Acceptilation. 

I.  An  obligation  is  also  dissolved  by  acceptilation ;  which  is  an 
imaginary  payment:  for,  if  Titius  is  willing  to  remit  what  is  due 
to  him  by  a  verbal  contract,  it  may  be  done,  if  the  debtor  says  ; 
do  you  regard  what  I  promised  you,  as  accepted  and   received  ? 
and  Titius  answers,  I  do.     An  acceptilation  may  also  be  made 
in  Greek,  if  it  is  so  worded,  as  to  agree  with  the  Latin  form ; 
t\ets  XaSfwj'  fyvapta  foaa ;   £^w  ^<x£u>v.      But  tne   obligations,  which 
are  thus  dissolved,  are  verbal  contracts,  and  no  other:  and  it  seems 
to  be  a  just  consequence,  that  an  obligation,  made  by  words  only, 
may  be  dissolved  by  other  words  of  a  contrary  import.     But  it  is 
observable,  that  any  species  of  contract  may  be  deduced  to  a  sti- 
pulation, and  of  course  may  be  dissolved  by  acceptilation.     And 
note,  that  as  a  debt  may  be  paid  in  part  by  money,  so  may  it  be 
paid  in  part  also  by  acceptilation. 

Of  the  Aquilian  Stipulation. 

II.  There  is  another  species  of  stipulation,  called  commonly 
the  Aquilian  stipulation,  by  virtue  of  which  every  other  kind  of 
obligation   may  be  reduced  to  a  stipulation,  and  may  afterwards 
be  dissolved   by   acceptilation.      For   the   Aquilian   stipulation 
changes  all  obligations,  and  was  constituted   by  Gallus  Aquilius 
in  the  following  manner.     Do  you  promise,  said  Aulus  Agerius 
to  Numerius  Nigidius,  to  pay  me  a  sum  of  money,  in  lieu  of  what 
you  was,  or  shall  be,  obliged  to  give  me  or  to  perform  for  my  bene- 
fit, either  simply,  at  a  day  to  come,  or  upon  condition  ;  and  in  lieu 
of  those  things,  which,   being  my  property,  you  have,  detain,  or 
possess ;  or  of  which  you  have  fraudulently  quitted  the  possession ; 
and  for  which  I  may,  or  shall  be,  entitled  to  any  species  of  action, 

VOL.  1.   No.  6.  Z 


178  THE  INSTITUTES. B.  in. 

plaint,  or  prosecution  ;  Numerius  Nigidius  answered  I  do:  and, 
when  this  was  said,  Numerius  Nigidius  asked  Aulus  Agerius,  if 
he  regarded  the  money  as  accepted  and  received,  which  he  (Nu- 
merius)  had  promised?  to  which  Aulus  Agerius  answered,  that 
he  did  regard  it  as  accepted  and  received. 

Of  Novation. 

III.  An  obligation  is  also  dissolved  by  novation;    as  when  you 
stipulate  with  Titius  to  receive  from  him  what  is  due  to  you  from 
Seius.     For,  by  the  intervention  of  a  new  debtor,  a  fresh  obliga- 
tion arises,  by  which  the  prior  obligation  is  discharged,  and 
transferred  to  the  latter.      And  sometimes,  although   the  latter 
stipulation  is  of  no  force,  yet  the  prior  contract  is  discharged  by 
the  mere  act  of  novation :  as  if  Titius  should  stipulate  to  receive 
a  debt,  which  I  owe  him,  from  a  pupil  without  the  authority  of 
his  tutor;  for  in  this  case  the  debt  is  lost,  because  the  first  debtor 
is  freed  from  his  debt,  and  the  second  obligation  is  null:  but  it  is 
not  the  same,  if  a  man  stipulates  from  a  slave,  with  a  design  to 
make  a  novation:    for  then  the  first  debtor  remains  bound,  as  if 
there  had  been  no  second  stipulation.      And,  if  you  stipulate 
from  the  same  person  a  second  time,  a  novation  arises,  if  any 
thing  new  is  covenanted  in  the  latter  stipulation,  as  when  a  con- 
dition, a  day,  or  a  bondsman  is  added,  or  taken  away.     But  note, 
that,  when  a  condition  only  is  added,  novation  does  not  take  place, 
till  the  event  happens;    and,  till  then,  the  prior  obligation  conti- 
nues.   It  was  observed  as  a  rule  among  the  ancient  lawyers,  that 
a  novation  arose,  when  a  second  contract  was  entered  into  with 
an  intent  to  dissolve  the  former;    but  it  was  always  a  matter  of 
great  difficulty  to  know  with  what  intent  the  second  obligation 
was  made ;  and  the  judges,  having  no  positive  proof  before  them, 
were  forced  to  form  their  opinions  upon  presumptions,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  circumstances  of  every  particular  case.     This 
incertainty  of  judging  gave  rise  to  our  constitution,  which  enacts, 
that  a  novation  of  a  former  contract  shall  only  take  place,  when 
it  is  expressed  by  the  contractors,  that  they  covenanted  with  an 
intent  to  make  a  novation ;  and  that,  when  this  is  not  expressed 
the  prior  contract  shall  continue  valid ;  and  the  second  be  regarded 
as  an  accessson  to  it :  so  that  an  obligation  may  remain  by  virtue 
of  both  contracts,  according  to  the  determination  of  our  before 
named  constitution,  which  may  be  better  known  by  perusal. 

By  Dissent. 

IV.  We  must  observe  farther,  that  those  obligations,  which 
are  contracted  by  consent,  may  be  dissolved  by  dissent.      For,  if 
Titius  and  Seius  have  agreed  by  compact  between  themselves. 


r.  xxx.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  179 

that  Seius  shall  have  a  certain  estate  for  an  hundred  aurei,  and 
afterwards  before  execution,  that  is,  before  the  price  is  paid,  or 
livery  is  made  of  the  lands,  if  the  parties  dissent  from  their 
agreement,  they  are  mutually  discharged  from  it.  And  the  same 
may  be  said  of  location  and  conduction,  and  of  all  other  contracts 
which  arise  from  consent. 

END  OF  THE  THIRD  BOOK. 


THE 

INSTITUTIONS 

OR 

ELEMENTS   OF  JUSTINIAN. 


TITLE  I. 

Of  Obligations  which  arise  from  Crime. 

HAVING  explained  in  the  preceding  book  the  nature  of  obli- 
gations, which  arise  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts,it  follows, 
that  we  should  here  treat  of  those,  which  arise  from  male-feasance 
and  quasi- male-feasance.  The  former,  as  we  have  shewed  in  the 
proper  place,  are  divided  into  four  species;  but  the  latter  are  of 
one  kind  only;  for  they  all  arise  ex  re,  that  is,  from  the  crime  or 
male-feasance  itself;  as  from  theft,  rapine,  damage,  injury. 
Definition  of  Theft. 

I.  Theft  is  a  fraudulent  substraction  of  the  thing  itself,  the  use 
of  it,  or  the  possession,  for  the  sake  of  gain.  And  this is  prohibited 
by  the  law  of  nature, 

Etymology. 

II  The  word  furtum,  theft,  is  derived  fromfurvum  ;  black  or 
dark  ;  because  theft  is  committed  privately,  and  generally  in  the 
night: — or  fromfraus,  fraud  :  — or  from  fertndo>  which  is  of  the 
same  import  with  auferendo,  and  denotes  a  subtraction,  or  taking 
away.  Or  perhaps furtum  is  derived  from  the  Greek;  for  the 

Greeks  call  fures,  dwoac;  and  d>cyoar  is  derived  from  Qepetv,  which 
.     .r          J  .       ,      r     '         r  '    - 
signifies  to  take  away. 


180  THE  INSTITUTES B.  it, 

Division. 

III.  Of  theft  there  are  two  species,  manifest  and  not  manifest: 
for  the  thefts,  called  conceptum  and  oblatum,  rather  denote  the 
species  of  action  arising  on  account  of  theft,  than  the  species  of 
theft ;   as  will  appear  in  the  next  paragraph.     A  manifest  thief, 
whom  the  Greeks  call  tv  aiVo^w/ow,  is  he,  who  is  taken  in  the  act 
of  thieving,  or  in  the  place,  where  he  committed  it;  as  if  a  man, 
having  committed  a  theft  within  an  house,  should  be  apprehended 
before  he  had  passed  through  the  outward  gate  of  it:  or,  having 
stolen  grapes  or  olives,  should   be   taken  in  the  vineyard  or  olive 
orchard.     Manifest  theft  is  also  farther  extended :  for,  if  the  thief 
is  apprehended,  whilst  he  is  seen  to  have  possession  of  the  thing 
stolen,  or  if  he  is  taken  in  public  or  in  private,  by  the  owner  or 
by  a  stranger,  at  any  time  before  his  arrival  at  the  place,  to  which 
be  proposed  to  carry  it,  he  is  guilty  of  a  manifest  theft.     But  if 
he  actually  arrives,  before  apprehension,  at  the  place  proposed, 
then,  although  the  thing  stolen  is  found  upon  him,  he  is  yet  not 
reputed  in  law  to  be  a  manifest  thief.     By  this  description,  which 
we  have  given  of  manifest  theft,  it  may  be  clearly  understood 
what  is  meant  by  theft  not  manifest. 

Of  the  division  of  Thefts  into  Conceptum,  Oblatum,  Prohibi- 
tum,  and  Exhibitum. 

IV.  A  theft  is  called  conceptum,  i.  e.  found,  when  a  thing 
stolen  is  searched  for  and  found  in  the  possession  of  some  person 
in  the  presence  of  witnesses  ;  and  a  particular  action,  called  actio 
concepti,  lies  against  such  possessor,  although  he  did  not  commit 
the  theft.     A  theft  is  called  oblatum,  i.  e.  offered,  when  a  thing 
stolen  is  offered  for  instance  to  Titius,  and  found   upon  him,  it 
having  been  given  to  him  by  Seius,  to  the  intent  that  it  might 
rather  be  found  upon  Titius  than  upon  himself:  and  in  this  case 
a  special  action,  called  actio  oblati,  may   be  brought  by  Titius 
against  Seius,  although  Seius  was  not  guilty  of  the  theft.    There 
is  also  an  action,  called  prohibiti  furti,  which  lies  against  him, 
who  hinders  another  to  enquire  of  theft  in  the  presence  of  wit- 
nesses.    And  farther,  a  penalty  was  constituted,  by  the  edict  of 
the  praetor,  to  be  sued  by  the  action/wtf  non  exhibiti  against  any 
man  for  not  having  exhibited  things  stolen,  which  upon  a  search 
were  found  to  have  been  in  his  possession.   But  these  four  actions 
are  become  quite  obsolete ;  for,  since  a  search  after  things  stolen  is 
not  now  made  according  to  the  ancient  formalities,  these  actions 
have  of  consequence  ceased  to  be  in  use;  for  it  is  a  settled  point, 
that  all,  who  knowingly  have   received   and  concealed  a  thing 
stolen,  are  subject  to  the  penalty  of  theft  not  manifest. 


T.  r.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  181 


Punishment. 

V.  The  penalty  of  committing  a  manifest  theft  is  quadruple^ 
whether  the  thief  is  free  or  bond  ;  and  the  penalty  of  committing 
a  theft  not  manifest  is  double  the  value  of  the  thing  stolen. 

How  Theft  is  committed.  $  k*it\: 

VI.  Theft  is  committed  not  only,   when  one  man   takes  the 
property  of  another  for  the  sake  of  appropriating  it  to   himself, 
but  also  in  a  more  general  sense,  when  one  man  uses  the  property 
of  another  against  the  will  of  the  proprietor;  thus,  if  a  creditor 
makes  use  of  a  pledge,  or  a  depositary  of  the  deposit  left  with 
him,  or  if  a  man,  who  hath  only  the  use  of  a  thing  for  a  special 
purpose,  converts  it  to  other  uses,  a  theft  is  committed.     And,  if 
any  one  borrows  plate  under  pretence  of  using  it,  at  an  entertain- 
ment of  his  friends,  and  then  carries  it  with  him  into  a  foreign 
country, — or  if  a  man  borrows  an  horse,  and  rides  it  farther  than 
he  ought,  theft  is  also  committed :  and  the   ancients  have  held 
this  to  be  law,  in  regard  to  him,  who  rides  a  borrowed  horse  into 
a  field  of  battle. 

Of  the  intent  of  Stealing. 

VII.  But  it  hath  been  nevertheless  been  adjudged,  that  who- 
ever applies  a  thing  borrowed  to  other  uses  than  those,  for  which 
he  borrowed  it,  is  not  guilty  of  theft,  for  unless  the   borrower 
knew,  that  he  so  applied  it,  contrary   to  the  will  of  thepwner, 

.  who  would  not  have  permitted  such  application,  if  he  had  been 
apprized  of  it.  But  it  has  also  been  held,  that  the  borrower  in 
this  case  is  not  guilty  of  theft,  if  it  appears,  that  he  thought,  that 
the  owner  would  have  given  his  consent.  And  this  is  a  good  dis- 
tinction ;  for  a  theft  can  never  be  committed,  unless  there  appears 
to  have  been  a  design  and  intention  of  stealing. 
Of  the  Will  of  the  Master. 

VIII.  But,  if  a  man  imagines,  that  he  uses  a  thing  borrowed 
in  some  manner  contrary  to  the   intention  and  will  of  the  pro- 
prietor, when  in  reality  the  proprietor  consents,  that  it  should  be 
so  used,  theft  is  not  committed  :  and  from  hence  arises  a  question 
upon  the  following  case.     Titius  solicited  the  slave  of  Maevius  to 
rob  his  master,  and  to  bring  him  the  things  stolen;  of  this  the 
slave  informed  his  master,  who,  being  willing  to  discover  TitiuB 
in  the  fact,  permitted  the  slave  to  carry  certain  things  to  Titius. 
as  stolen  ;  will  Titius,,  in  this  case,  be  subject  to  an  action  of  theft, 
or  to  an  action  for  having  corrupted  a  slave,  or  to  neither  ?  When 
this  was  proposed  to  us  as  a  matter  of  doubt,  and  we  perceived  the 
altercations,  which  had  formerly   subsisted  among   the  ancient 
lawyers  upon  the  same  point,  some  of  them  allowing  of  neither 


182  THE  INSTITUTES  a.  ir, 

of  the  before-named  actions,  and  others  allowing  an  action  of  theft 
only,  we  therefore,  being  willing  to  obviate  all  subtilities,  decreed 
by  our  constitution,  that  not  only  an  action  of  theft  might  be 
brought,  but  also  the  action  servi  corrupti,  which  lies  for  having 
corrupted  a  slave.  For  although  the  slave  became  not  the  worse 
for  the  solicitation,  and  therefore  the  causes,  which  introduce  the 
action  servi  corrupti,  do  not  concur ;  yet  inasmuch  as  such  solici- 
tation was  intended  to  corrupt,  it  hath  therefore  pleased  us,  that 
a  pefia!  action  shall  lie  against  the  party  soliciting  in  the  same 
manner  as  if  he  had  actually  succeeded  by  corrupting  the  slave  : 
and  this  we  have  ordained,  lest  impunity  might  encourage  any 
evil-disposed  persons  to  make  the  same  attempt  upon  other  slaves, 
who  might  have  less  strength  of  mind,  and  be  more  easily 
corrupted. 

Of  the  objects  of  Theft.     Of  free  Men. 

IX.  A  theft  may  be  committed  even  of  free  persons ;  as,  for 
instance,  when  children,  who  are  under  power,  are  surreptitiouslv 
taken  from  their  parents. 

Of  your  own  Property. 

X.  A  man  may  also  possibly  commit  a  theft  even  of  his  own 
property  ;  as  when  a  debtor  hath  taken  away  any  particular  thing, 
which  he  had  left  in  pledge  with  his  creditor. 

Of  Auxiliaries  in   Theft. 

XL  An  action  of  theft  will,  in  some  cases,  lie  against  persons, 
who  did  not  actually  commit  the  theft ;  it  will  lie,  for  exam- 
ple, against  those,  by  whose  aid  and  advice  the  theft  was  com- 
mitted ;  and  whoever  strikes  money  out  of  your  hand,  to  the  in- 
tent that  another  may  pick  it  up;  or  whoever  so  obstructs  you, 
as  to  give  an  opportunity  to  his  accomplice  to  take  your  sheep, 
oxen,  or  any  part  of  your  property,  must  be  reckoned  in  the  num- 
ber of  aiders  and  advisers.  The  ancient  lawyers  also  included 
him  in  this  number,  who  frightened  away  a  herd  from  its  pasture 
with  a  red  cloth.  But,  if  a  man  should  do  any  of  these  acts  wan- 
tonly, and  without  an  intention  of  committing  theft,  then  an  action 
can  lie  only  in  factum-,  i.  e.  upon  the  case,  or  the  fact  done: 
but,  when  Titius  commits  theft  by  the  aid  of  Majvius,  they  are 
both  subject  to  an  action  of  theft.  Theft  seems  to  be  committed 
both  by  aid  and  advice,  when  a  man  puts  a  ladder  to  a  window, 
or  breaks  open  a  door  or  window,  to  the  intent,  that  another  may 
commit  theft;  or  when  one  man  lends  another  iron  bars,  or  lad- 
ders, knowing  the  bad  purposes,  to  which  they  are  to  be  applied. 
But  it  is  certain,  that  he,  who  hath  afforded  no  actual  assistance, 
but  hath  only  given  his  counsel  by  advising  the  crime,  isnotliable 
to  an  action  of  theft 


T.I. OF  JUSTINIAN. 183 

XII.  When  persons  under  the  power  of  parents  or  masters  take 
any  thing  surreptitiously  from  such  parents  or  masters,  a  theft  is 
committed,  and  the  thing  is  looked  upon   as  stolen;  so  that  it 
cannot  be  prescribed- to  by  any  one,  until  it  hath  first  reverted 
into  the  power  of  the  proprietor;  and  yet  an  action  of  theft  will 
not  lie;  for  between  parents  and  their  children,  or  masters  and 
slaves,  no  action  can  arise  upon  any   account.     But  if  the  fact 
was  done  by  the  aid  and  advice  of  any  other,  inasmuch  as  a  theft 
is  committed,  an  action  of  theft  will  lie  against  the  aider. 

XIII.  An  action  of  theft  may  be  brought  by  any  man,  who  has 
an  interest  in  the  safety  of  the  thing  stolen,  although  he  is  not  the 
proprietor  of  it:  and  the  proprietor  himself  can  have  no  action, 
unless  he  has  an  interest. 

XIV.  From  hence  it  follows,  that  a  creditor  may  bring  an  ac- 
tion of  theft,  on  account  of  a  pledge  stolen,  although  his  debtor  is 
solvent;  because   it  may  be  more  expedient  for  him  to  rely  upon 
his  pledge,  than  to  bring  an  action  against  the  person  of  his  debtor; 
and,   although  the  debtor  himself  should  have  been  the  taker  of 
the  pledge,  yet  an  action  of  theft  will  lie  against  him. 

XV.  If  a  fuller  receives  cloths  to  clean,  and  they  are  afterwards 
stolen  from  him,  the  fuller  may  bring  an  action  of  theft,  but  not 
the  owner;  for  the  owner  is  reputed  to  have  no  interest  in  their 
safety,  because  he  has  a  right  of  action,  called  locati,  against  the 
fuller.     But,   if  a  thing  is  stolen  from  a  bonafide  purchaser,  he  is 
intitled,  like  a  creditor,  to  an  action  of  theft,  although  he  is  not 
the  proprietor.     But  an  action  of  theft  is  not  maintainable  by  the 
fuller,  or  any  tradesman  in  similar  circumstances,   unless  he  is 
solvent;  that  is,   unless  he  is  able  to  pay  the  owner  the  full  value 
of  the  thing  lost;  for,  if  the  fuller  is  insolvent,  then  the  owner, 
who  cannot  recover  from  the  fuller,  is  allowed  to  bring  an  action 
of  theft,  having  in  this  case  an  interest.    And  note,  that  whoever 
is  unable  to  pay  the  whole  of  what  is  due,  such  person  is  esteemed 
insolvent,  let  the  deficiency  be  ever  so  small. 

Of  Things  lent. 

XVI.  The  ancients  were  of  opinion,  that  what  we  have  said  of 
a  fuller  is  equally  applicable  to  him,  to  whom  something  is  lent. 
For  as  the  fuller,  by  agreeing  for  a  certain  price,  is  obliged  to 
make  good  the  cloths  committed  to  his  custody,  so  is  he  also,  who 
receives  a   loan  for  the  sake  of  using  it,  under  the  like  necessit}' 
of  preserving  it.     But  we  have  amended  the  law  in  this  point  by 
our  decisions,  so  that  it  is  now  at  the  will  of  the  owner  either  to 
bring  an  action  of  theft  against  the  thief,  or  an  action,  on  account 
of  the  tiling  lent,  against  the  borrower.    But,  if  the  owner  once 


184  THE  INSTITUTES  if.  it, 


makes  an  election  of  the  one,  he  can  never  afterwards  have  re- 
course to  the  other;  and,  if  he  chuses  to  prosecute  the  thief,  the 
borrower  is  altogether  free  from  any  action;  and  if  the  owner,  or 
lender,  brings  a  suit  against  the  borrower,  he  can  by  no  means 
bring  an  action  against  the  thief.     But  the  borrower,  who  is  con- 
vened on  account  of  the  thing  lent,  may  bring  an  action  of  theft 
against  the  thief,  if  the  owner,  who  convened  him,  was  apprized 
that  the  thing  was  stolen ;  but,  if  the  owner,  either  not  knowing 
or  doubting  of  the  theft,  institutes  an  action  of  loan  against  the 
borrower,  and  afterwards  upon  information  is  willing  to  withdraw 
it,  and  recur  to  an  action  of  theft,  he  shall  have  liberty,  in  consi- 
deration of  his  incertainty,  to  prosecute  the  thief  without  obstacle, 
if  the  borrower  has  not  satisfied  his  demand;  but,  if  the  borrower 
has  given  the  owner  satisfaction,  then  the  thief  is  freed  from  any 
action  of  theft,  which  can   be  brought  by  the  owner :  but  he  is 
nevertheless  subject  to  the  prosecution  of  the  borrower,  who  hath 
satisfied  the  owner.     But  it  is  most  manifest,  that,  if  the  owner  of 
any  particular  thing,  not  knowing,  that  it  is  stolen,  should  at  first 
institute  an  action  of  loan  against  the  borrower,  but  should  after- 
wards, upon  better  information,  chuse  to  pursue  the  thief  by  an 
action  of  theft,  the  borrower  is  secure,  whatever  may  be  the  issue 
of  the  action  brought  against  the  thief.    And  this  obtains  as  law, 
whether  the  borrower  is  able  to  answer  the  whole,  or  a  part  only, 
of  the  value  of  the  thing. 

Of  Things  deposited. 

XVII.  A  depositary  is  not  obliged  to  make  good  the  thing  de- 
posited, unless  he  is  himself  guilty  of  some  fraud,  or  malefeasance : 
and  therefore,  as  a  depositary  is  not  obliged  to  make  restitution, 
when  the  deposit  is  stolen,  and  he  has  consequently  no  interest  in 
the  conservation  of  the  deposit,  he  is  not  aHowed  to  bring  an  ac- 
tion of  theft,  which  in  this  case  can  only  be  maintained  by  the 
owner. 

XVIII.  It  hath  been  a  question,  whether  a  person  within  pu- 
berty, who  hath  taken  away  the  property  of  another,  can  be  guilty 
of  theft?  And  it  hath  been  determined,  that,  inasmuch  as  theft 
consists  in  the  intention  of  defrauding,  a  person  within  puberty 
may  be  charged  with  theft,  if  he  is  near  the  age  of  puberty,  and 
can  be  proved  to  have  been  sensible,  that  what  he  did  was  criminal. 

XIX.  An  action  of  theft  can  only  be  brought  for  the  penalty, 
whether  double  or  quadruple  :  for  the  owner  of  the  thing  stolen 
may  recover  the  thing  itself  either  by  vindication  or  condiction. 
An  action  of  vindication  may  be  brought  against  him,  who  hath 
possession,  whether  he  is  the  thief  or  any  other  ;  but  condiction  is 


T.  i.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  183 

maintainable  only  against  the  thief  himself,  or  his  heir  ;  yet  it  will 
lie  against  either  of  them,  whether  he  is  or  is  not  in  possession  of 
the  thing  stolen. 


TITLE  II. 
OF  THEFT  BY  FORCE. 

HE  who  takes  the  property  of  another  by  force,  is  liable  to  an 
action  of  theft;  [for  who  can  be  said  to  take  the  property  of  an- 
other more  against  his  will,  than  he  who  takes  it  by  force;  an4 
it  hath  therefore  been  rightly  observed,  that  such  a  thief  is  one  of 
the  worst  kind  :]  but  the  praetor  hath  nevertheless  introduced  a 
peculiar  action  in  this  case/called  "  vi  bonorum  raptorum  ;"  which, 
if  brought  within  a  year  after  the  robbery,  inforces  the  payment 
of  the  quadruple  value  of  the  thing  taken  ;  but,  if  it  is  brought 
after  the  expiration  of  a  year,  then  the  single  value  only  is 
claimable;  and  this  action  is  of  such  a  nature,  that  it  may  be 
brought  for  any  single  thing,  though  it  was  of  the  least  value 
imaginable,  if  it  was  taken  by  force.  But  the  whole  quadruple 
value  is  not  exacted  merely  for  the  penalty,  as  in  an  action  of 
manifest  theft;  for,  in  this  quadruple  value,  the  thing  itself  is  in- 
cluded, so  that,  strictly,  the  penalty  is  only  threefold  ;  but  then 
it  is  inflicted  without  distinguishing  whether  the  robber  was  or 
was  not  taken  in  the  actual  commission  of  the  fact.  For  it  would 
be  ridiculous,  that  a  robber  who  uses  force  should  be  in  a  better 
condition  than  he,  who  is  only  guilty  of  a  clandestine  theft. 

I.  The  action  "  de  vi  bonorum  raptorum,"  is  only  maintain- 
able when  there  is  fraud  used,  as  well  as  force ;  for,  if  a  man, 
being  ignorant  of  the  law,  and  erroneously  thinking  any  particu- 
lar thing  to  be  his  own,  should  take  it  away  by  force  from  the 
possessor,  upon  a  full  persuasion  that  he,  as  proprietor,  could 
justify  such  a  proceeding,  he  ought  to  be  acquitted  upon  this 
action  :  neither  is  he  subject,  under  the  before-mentioned  circum- 
stances, to  an  action  of  theft.  But,  lest  robbers  should  from 
hence  find  out  a  way  of  practising  their  villainies  with  impunity, 
it  is  provided  by  the  imperial  constitutions,  that  no  man  shall  be 
at  liberty  to  take  by  force  any  moveable  thing,  or  living  crea- 
ture, out  of  the  possession  of  another,  although  he  believes  it  to 
be  his  own ;  and  that,  whoever  offends,  by  forcibly  seizing  his 
property,  shall  forfeit  it;  and  that,  whoever  takes  the  property  of 
another,  imagining  it  to  be  his  own,  shall  be  obliged,  not  only  to 
restore  the  thing  itself,  but  also  to  pay  the  value  of  it  as  a  pe- 
nalty. And  the  emperors  have  thought  proper  that  this  should 
obtain,  not  only  in  regard  to  things  moveable  and  moving,  which 

VOL.  I.  No.  6.  2  A 


18(5  THE  INSTITUTES  _  B.  iv. 

may  be  carried  away,  but  also  in  regard  to  invasions,  or  forcible 
entries,  made  upon  things  immoveable,  as  lands  or  houses,  to  the 
intent  that  mankind  may  be  deterred  from  committing  any  spe- 
cies of  rapine. 

II.  In  this  action,  it  is  not  considered,  whether  the  thing,  taken 
by  force,  is  or  is  not  the  property  of  the  complainant;  for,  if  lie 
has  an  interest  in  it,  the  action  is  maintainable  ;  and  therefore,  if 
a  thing  is  let,  lent,  or  pledged  to  Titius,  or  deposited  with  him, 
so  that  he  becomes  interested  in  the  preservation  of  it,  as  he  may 
be,  even  in  the  case  of  a  deposit,  if  he  hath  promised  to  be  an- 
swerable for  its  safe  custody;  or,  if  Titius  was  a  bona  fide  pro- 
fessor, or  entitled  to  the  usufruct,  or  has  any  other  right  which 
gives  an  interest,  he  may  bring  this  action,  not  for  the  recovery 
of  the  absolute  property,  but  of  that  only  to  which  his  interest 
extends.  And  we  may  in  general  affirm,  that  the  same 
causes  which  entitle  a  man  to  institute  an  action  of  theft,  when 
any  thing  hath  been  privately  stolen  from  him,  will  also  entitle 
him  to  bring  the  action  "  vi  bonorum  raptorum,"  when  force  hath 
been 


ccw  oVfifs  s  K     oJ  \T" 

TITLE  III. 

OF  THE  AQUILIAN  LAW. 

THE  action  for  injurious  damage  is  given  by  the  law  Aquilia; 
which  enacts,  in  the  first  chapter,  that,  if  any  man  injuriously 
kills  the  slave,  or  four-footed  beast  of  another,  which  maybe 
reckoned  in  the  number  of  his  cattle,  he  shall  be  condemned  to 
pay  the  owner  the  greatest  price  which  the  slave  or  beast  might 
have  been  sold  for,  at  any  time  within  a  year,  computing  back- 
ward from  the  day  when  the  wound  was  given. 

Of  Quadrupeds  to  he  considered  as  Cattle.          y*, 

I.  As  the  law  does  not  speak  of  four-footed  beasts  in  general, 
but  of  those  only  which  may  be  reckoned  cattle  we  may  collect, 
that  wild  beasts    and   dogs  do   not    come  within   the   intend  - 
ment  of  the  law,  which  can  be  understood  to  include  only  those 
animals  which  feed  in  herds  ;  as  horses,   mules,  asses,  sheep, 
oxen,  goats,  £c.  -  It  hath  also  been  determined,  that  swine  are 
comprised  under  the  term  cattle,  because  they  feed  in  herds  ;  and 
this  Homer  testifies  in  the  Odyssy,  for  which  he  is  quoted  by 
JElius  Marcian  in  his  institutions.    "You  will  find  him  taking 
care  of  the  swine,  which  feed  in  herds  on  the  Corasian  rock,"  &c. 
Odys.  b.  13. 

Of  Injury. 

II.  A  man  who  kills  another  without  having  a  right  or  autho- 
rity so  to  do,  is  understood  to  kill  him  injuriously;  but,  when 


T.  iii. OF  JUSTINIAN. 187 

there  is  a  right,  there  can  be  no  punishment;  and  therefore  he  is 
not  subject  to  the  law  who  kills  a  robber,  or  an  assassin,  if  there 
was  no  other  way  of  avoiding  the  danger  threatened, 
Of  Accidents ,  Fraud,  and  Negligence. 

III.  Neither  is  he  subject  to  the  Aquilian  law,  who  hath  killed 
another  by  accident;  if  no  fault  can  be  found  in  him.     But  the 
law  does  not  punish  a  man  less  for  damage  done  by  his  fault  or 
negligence  than  for  damage  done  by  fraud  or  design. 

Of  throwing  Darts. 

IV.  But  if  a  man,  by  throwing  a  javelin  for  his  diversion  or 
exercise,  happens  to  kill  a  slave  who  is  passing,  we  must,  in  thig 
case,  make  a  distinction:  for  if  the  slave  is  killed  by  a  soldier, 
whilst  he  is  exercising  in  a  place  appointed  for  that  purpose,  the 
soldier  is  guilty  of  no  fault ;  but,  if  any  other  person  should  acci- 
dentally kill  a  slave  by  throwing  a  javelin,  he  is  guilty  of  a  fault; 
and  even,  if  a  soldier  should  kill  a  slave  accidentally  by  throwing 
a  javelin  in  any  other  place  than  that  appointed  for  soldiers  to  ex- 
ercise in,  he  also  is  guilty  of  a  fault. 

Of  felling  Trees. 

V.  If  a  man  is  lopping  a  tree,  and  happens  to  kill  a  slave  who 
is  passing,  the  lopper  is  guilty  of  a  fault,  if  he  worked  near  a  pub- 
lic road,  or  in  a  way  leading  to  a  village,  without  giving  a  proper 
warning  by  proclamation  ;  but  if  he  made  due  proclamation,  and 
the  other  did  not  take  proper  care  of  himself,  thelopper  is  exempt 
from  fault;  and  he  is  equally  exempt  from  fault,  although  he  did 
not  make  proclamation,  if  he  worked  apart  from  the  high  road,  or 
in  the  middle  of  a  field;  for  a  stranger  has  no  right  of  passage 
through  such  places. 

Of  neglecting  a  Cure. 

VI.  Also,  if  a  physician,  or  chirurgeon,  who  has  made  an  in- 
cision in  the  body  of  a  slave,  should  afterwards  neglect  or  forsake 
the  cure,  by  which  the  death  of  a  slave  is  occasioned,  he  is  guilty 
of  a  fault. 

,V  ii     :  .':'--*..   frt^itf'. 

Want  of  Skill  in  a  Profession. 

VII.  The  want  of  skill  in  a  profession  is  also  regarded  as  a 
fault ;  thus  a  physician,  for  instance,  is  culpable,  and  of  course 
subject  to  an  action,  who  occasions  the  death  of  a  slave  by  an 
unskilful  incision,  or  a  rash  administration  of  medicines. 

Of  want  of  Skill  in  Drivers. 

VIII.  If  a  mule-driver,  by  reason  of  unskilfulness^  is  unable  to 
manage  his  mules,  and  a  slave  is  run  over  by  them,  the  mule- 
tl river  is  in  fault;  and,  if  he  wants  strength  to  rein   them  in, 
when  another  man  is- able  to  do  it,  he  is  then  equally  culpable ; 


188      TH£  INSTITUTES B.  iv. 

and  the  same  may  be  said  of  a  rider,  who,  through  want  either  of 
strength  or  skill,  is  notable  to  manage  his  horse. 

IX.  These  words  of  the  law  Aquilia,  "Let  him  who  kills  a 
slaye,  or  beast  of  another,  forfeit  the  greatest  price  which  either 
could  have  been  sold  for  in  that  year,"  are  to  be  understood  in  the 
following  sense;  as  thus,  if  Titius  accidentally  kills  a  slave  who 
was  then  lame,  or  wanted  a  limb  or  an  eye,  but  had  been  within 
the  space  of  a  year  perfect  in  all  his  parts,  and  very  valuable, 
then  Titius  shall  be  obliged  to  pay,  not  what  the  slave  was  worth 
on  the  day  .when  he  was  killed,  but  what  he  was  worth  at  any 
•time  within  a  year  preceding  his  death,  when  he  was  in  the 
fullest  vigour.     An  action,  therefore,  upon  the  law  Aquilia,  has 
always  been  regarded  as  penal ;  for  it  obliges  a  man  to  pay  not 

''only  the  full  value  of  the  damage  done,  but  often  much  more  than 
the  full  value ;  and,  of  consequence,  can  by  no  means  pass  against 
the  heir  of  the  offender :  but  it  might  legally  have  been  transferred 
against  the  heir,  if  the  condemnation  had  never  exceeded  the 
quantum  of  the  damage. 

X.  It  hath  prevailed  by  construction,  though  not  by  virtue  of 
the  express  words  of  the  law,  that  not  only  the  value  of  a  slave  is 
to  be  computed,  as  we  have  already  mentioned;  but  that  an  esti- 
mation must  be  made  of  whatever  farther  damage  is  occasioned 
by  his  death;  as  if  Titius,  for  example,  should  kill  a  slave  at  the 
time,  when  he  was  instiuted  an  heir,  and  before  he  had  actually 
entered  upon  the  heirship  at  the  command  of  his  master;   for,  in 
this  case,  the  loss  of  the  inheritance  must  be  brought  into  the 
computation.    Also  if  an  horse,  or  mule  is  killed,  by  which  a 
pair,  or  set,  is  broken,  or  if  a  slave  is  slain,  who  made  one  of  a 
company  of  comedians,  an   estimation  must  be  made  not  only 
according  to  the  value  of  that  slave  or  animal,  but  according  to 
the  value  of  those,  which  remain;    for,  if  they  are  damaged,  the 
diminution  of  their  value  is  also  taken  into  the  account. 

XI.  The  master  of  a  slave,  who  is  killed,  is  at  liberty  to  sue  for 
damages  by  a  private  action,  founded  upon  the  law  Aquilia,  and 
at  the  same  time  to  prosecute  the  offender  publicly,  for  a  capital 
crime. 

XII.  The  second  chapter  of  the  law  Aquilia  is  not  in  use. 

XIII.  By  the  third  chapter  of  this  law,  a  remedy  is  given  for 
every  other  kind  of  damage;    and  therefore,  if  a  man  wounds  a 
slave,  or  four-footed  animal,  which  is  ranked  among  cattle,  or 
which  is  not  ranked  among  cattle,  as  a  dog  or   wild   beast,  an 
action  will  lie  against  him  by  virtue  of  this  third  part  of  the  law. 
A.  reparation  may  also  be  obtained,  under  this  chapter,  for  all 


Y.  in. OF  JUSTINIAN. 189 

damage  injuriously  done  to  animals  in  general,  or  to  things  inani- 
mate; and  the  same  chapter  appoints  an  action  for  the  recovery  of 
the  value  of  whatever  is  burned,  spoiled,  or  broken ;  but  the  term 
ruptum  would  alone  be  sufficient  in  any  of  these  cases;  form 
whatever  manner  a  thing  is  damaged,  or  corrupted,  it  is  under- 
stood to  be  ruptum,  or  spoiled,  in  some  degree;  so  that  whenever 
a  thing  is  broken,  burned,  or  even  torn,  bruised,  spilled,  or  in  any 
manner  made  worse,  it  may  be  said  to  be  ruptum.  It  hath  also 
been  determined,  that  if  a  man  intermixes  any  thing,  with  the 
wine  or  oil  of  another,  so  as  to  corrupt  or  impair  its  natural  good- 
ness, he  is  liable  to  an  action  founded  upon  this  chapter  of  the 
Jaw  Aquilia. 

XIV.  It  is  evident,  that  the  first  part  or  chapter  of  the  law 
subjects  every  man  to  an  action,  who  through  design  or  accident 
kills  the  slave  or  beast  of  another,  and  that  the  third  part  gives  a 
remedy  for  any  other  damage,  so  occasioned.     But  by  this  third 
chapter  the  person,  who  did  the  damage,  is  not  obliged  to  pay  the 
highest  price,  which  the  thing  damaged   might  have  'been  sold 
for,  at  any  time  within  the  year,  but  only  the  value  of  it  at  any 
time  within  thirty  days,  previous  to  the  damage. 

XV.  But  it  is  not  said  in  the  third  part  of  the  law,  that  die 
highest  value  of  the  thing  damaged  shall  be  recovered  by  action. 
But,  in  the  opinion  of  Sabinus,  the  valuation  ought  to  be  made, 
as  if  the  word  highest  had  not  been  admitted;  for,  "when  Aquilius, 
the  tribune,  proposed  this  law,  the  commonalty  of  Rome  thought 
it  sufficient  to  insert  the  word  highest  in  the  first  chapter. 

XVI.  It  has  been  determined,  that,  if  a  man  hath,  with  his  own 
hand  or  body,  done  damage  to  another,  a  direct  action  will  lie  by 
virtue  of  this  law.    But  when  damage  is  done  by  any  other  means, 
as  by  imprisoning  a  slave,  or  impounding  the  cattle  of  another, 
till  they  die  with  hunger;    by  driving  a  beast  of  burden  so  vehe- 
mently as  to  spoil  him  ;  by  chasing  a  herd  of  cattle,  till  they  leap 
down  a  precipice  ;  oc  by  persuading  a  slave  to  climb  a  tree,  or  go 
down  into  a  well,  by  which  he  is  killed  or  maimed;    then  the 
action,  called  utilis,  is  given,  by  which  reparation  may  be  obtained. 
And  note,  that,  if  Titius  thrusts  the  slave  of  another  into  the 
water  from  the  top  of  a  bridge  or  bank,  and  the  slave  is  drowned^ 
in  consequence  of  the  fall,  it  is  plain,  that  Titius  occasioned  this 
damage  with  his  own  hands,  and  he  is  therefore  subject  to  a  di- 
rect action.     But  if  the  damage  received   was  not  done  by  the 
hand  or  body  of  another,  and  is  not  corporal,  so  that  neither  a  di- 
rect nor  beneficial  action  can  be  brought  by  virtue  of  the  Aquilian 
Jaw,  then  in  these  circumstances  an  action  upon  the  case,  or  fact, 


190  THE  INSTITUTES 


will  lie  against  the  causer  of  the  damage;  and  therefore,  if  any 
roan  through  compassion  should  unchain  the  slave  of  another,  and 
so  promote  his  escape,  a  reparation  may  be  obtained  against  him 
by  an  action  upon  the  fact. 

TITLE  IV. 
OF  INJURIES. 

THE  word  Injuria  in  a  general  sense  denotes  every  act,  which 
is  unjust;  but,  when  specially  used,  it  is  of  the  same  import  with 
contumelia,  which  takes  its  derivation  from  contemno,  and  is  in 
greek  termed  v€pi$  :  sometimes  it  signifies  a  fault,  called  by  the 
greeks  o&^a,  ii>  which  acceptation  it  is  used  in  the  law  Aquilia, 
when  damage,  injuriously  given,  is  spoken  of:  at  other  times  it 
signifies  iniquity  or  injustice,  which  the  greeks  call  avoia/uv  and 
actKiav  :  therefore,  when  the  praetor  or  judge  pronounces  sentence 
unjustly  against  any  person,  such  person  is  said  to  have  suffered 
an  injury. 

I.  An  injury  may  be  done  not  only  by  beating  and  wounding, 
but  also  by  convitious  language,  or  by  seizing  the  goods  C|f  a  man, 
as  if  he  were  a  debtor,  when  the  person,  who  seized  ttyem,  well 
knew,  that  nothing  was  due  to  him.    It  is  also  manifest,  that  an 
injury  may  be  committed  by  writing  a  defamatory  libel,  poem,  or 
history  ;  or  by  maliciously  causing  another  so  to  do  ;  also  by  con- 
tinually soliciting  the  chastity  of  a  boy,  girl,  or  woman  of  reputa- 
tion ;  and  by  various  other  means,  which  are  two  numerous  to  be 
specified. 

II.  A  man  may  receive  an  injury  not  only  in  his  own  person, 
but  in  that  of  his  children  under  his  power,  and  also  in  the  person 
of  his  wife  ;  for  this  is  now  the  more  prevalent  opinion  :  and  there- 
fore, if  an  injury  is  done  to  Seius's  daughter,  who  is  married  to 
Titius,  an  action  may  be  brought  not  only  in  the  name  of  the 
daughter,  but  in  the  name  either  of  her  father  or  her  husband  ; 
but,  if  the  husband  receives  an  injury,  the  wife  is  not  allowed  to 
institute  a  suit  in  his  defence;  for  it  is  a  maxim,  that  wives  may 
be  defended  by  their  husbands,  but  not  husbands  by  their  wives. 
And  note,  that  a  father-in-law  may  also  commence  a  suit  in  the 
name  of  his  son's  wife,  on  account  of  an  injury  done  to  her,  if  her 
husband  is  under  the  power  of  his  father. 

III.  An  injury  is  never  understood  to  be  done  to  a  slave;  but 
is  reputed  to  be.  done  to  the  master,  through  the  person  of  his 
slave:  but  what  amounts  to  an  injury  in  regard  to  a  wife  or  child, 
does  not  amount  to  an  injury,  suffered   through  the  person  of  a 
slave;  and  therefore  to  constitute  an  injury,  by  means  of  the 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


son  of  a  slave,  some  considerable  damage  must  be  done  to  him, 
and  something  which  openly  affects  his  master;  as  if  a  stranger 
should  beat  the  slave  of  another  in  a  cruel  manner  :  for  in  this  case 
an  action  would  lie;  but,  if  a  man  should  only  give  ill  language 
to  a  slave,  or  strike  him  with  his  fist,  the  master  can  bring  no 
action  upon  that  account. 

IV.  If  an  injury  is  done  to  the  common  slave  of  many  masters, 
the  estimation  of  the  injury  received  is  not  to  be  made  according 
to  their  several  proportions  of  property  in  the  slave,  but  according 
to  the  quality  of  each  master  ;  for  is  it  to  them,  to  whom  the 
injury  is  done. 

V.  If  Titius  has  the  usufruct  of  a  slave,  and  Maevius  the  pro- 
perty, then  any  injury,  which  is  done  to  that  slave,  is  understood 
to  be  done  to  Maevius  the  proprietor. 

VI.  But,  if  an  injury  is  done  to  a  free  person,  who  is  in  the  ser- 
vice of  Titius,  Titius  can  bring  no  action  of  injury,  but  the  ser- 
vant must  commence  a  suit  in  his  own  name,  unless  the  person, 
\vho  beat  him,  did  it  principally  for  the  sake  of  affronting  his 
master;  and,  in  this  case,  Titius  may  also  bring  an  action  of  injury. 
The  same  law  likewise  obtains,  if  your  servant  is  the  slave  of 
another  ;  for  as  often  as  he  receives  an  injury,  which  was  intended 
to  affront  you,  you  may  yourself  bring  an  action  of  injury. 

VII.  The  punishment  of  an  injury,  according  to  the  Twelve 
Tables,  was  a  return  of  the  like  injury,  if  any  limb  was  broken; 
but,  if  a  blow  only  was  given,  or  a  single  bone  broken,  then  the 
punishment  was  pecuniary,  which  was  not  without  effect  among 
the  ancients,  who  lived  in  great  poverty.    The  praetors  afterwards 
permitted  the  parties  injured  to  fix  their  damages  at  a  certain 
sum,  which  might  serve  as  a  guide  to  the  judge,  but  not  preclude 
him  from  lessening  the  estimate  at  his  discretion.     The  species 
of  pecuniary  punishment,  which  was  introduced  by  the  law  of 
the  Twelve  Tables,  fell  by  degrees  into  desuetude,  and  that  which 
the  praetors  gave  rise  to  is  now  solely  in  use,  and  is  termed  ho- 
norary ;  for  the  estimation  of  an  injury  is  either  increased  or  di- 
minished according  to  the  degree  and  quality  of  the  person  in- 
jured; and  this  distinction  of  degree  is  not  improperly  observed 
even  in  regard  to  slaves  ;  so  that  the  same  injury  may  be  variously 
estimated,  according  to  the  state  and  condition  of  him  who  suf- 
fered it  ;  at  an  higher  rate,  if  he  had  acted  as  steward  or  agent  to 
his  master,  and  at  a  lower  estimation  if  he  was  a  slave  of  an  in- 

ferior sort. 

4r>fino  >7ifiJe 

Of  the  Cornelian  Law.     .  . 

VIIL  The  law  Cornelia  speaks  also  of  injuries,  and  hath  intro- 


THE  INSTITUTES 


duced  an  action,  which  lies,  when  a  man  alleges  that  he  hath  been 
struck  or  beaten,  pr  that  another  hath  forcibly  entered  into  his 
house  ;  and  any  man  is  alrowed  in  this  case  to  allege  an  house  to 
be  his  own,  whether  it  is  in  reality  his,  or  whether  he  only  hires 
or  borrows  it,  or  even  lives  in  it  as  a  guest.  ;,&  tnoun. 

Of  an  atrocious  Injury. 

IX.  An  injury  is  esteemed  atrocious,  sometimes  from  the  na- 
ture of  the  fact,  as  when  a  man  is  wounded  by  another,  or  'beaten 
with  a  club;  sometimes  from   the  place,  as  when  an   injury  is 
done  in  a  public  theatre,  in  an  open  market,  or  in  the  presence 
of  a  praetor;  and  sometimes  by  reason  of  the  rank  of  the  person, 
as  when  a  magistrate,  or  a  senator,  receives  an  injury  from  one  of 
mean  condition;  or  when  a  parent  is  injured  by  his  child,  or  a 
patron  by  his  freed  man  ;  for  an  injury  done  to  a  senator,  or  to  a 
parent  by  his  child,  or  to  a  patron  by  his  freedman,  must  be  atoned 
'for  by  an  heavier  punishment  than  an  injury  done  to  a  stranger, 

or  a  person  of  low  degree.  Also  the  part  in  which  a  wound  is 
given  may  constitute  an  injury  atrocious;  as  if  a  man  should  be 
wounded  in  his  eye  ;  but  it  makes  no  manner  of  alteration, 
whether  such  an  injury  is  done  to  the  father  of  a  family,  or  to 
the  son  of  a  family  :  for  the  injury  will  neither  be  the  more  nor 
the  less  atrocious  upon  this  account. 

Of  the  Civil  and  Criminal  Remedy. 

X.  In  fine,  it  must  be  observed  concerning  every  injury,  that 
the  party  injured  may  sue  the  offending  party,  either  criminally 
or  civilly.     If  the  party  injured  sues  civilly,  the  damage  occa- 
sioned by  the  injury  must  be  estimated,  and  the  penalty  injoined 
accordingly,  as  we  have  before  noticed;  but,  if  he  sues  crimi- 
nally, it  is  the  duty  of  the  judge  to  inflict  an  extraordinary  punish- 
ment upon  the  offender;  observing  the  constitution  of  Zeno, 
which  permits  all   persons  who  have  a  right  to  be  called  illus- 
trious, and,  of  consequence,  all  who  enjoy  a  superior  title,  either 
to  pursue  or  defend  criminally  any  action  of  injury  by  their  proc- 
tors; but  the  tenor  of  this  law  will  more  fully  appear  by  a  peru- 
sal of  the  ordinance  itself. 

XL  An  action  of  injury  does  not  only  lie  against  him  who  hath 
done  an  injury,  by  giving  a  blow,  &c.  but  also  against  him,  who, 
by  his  craft  and  persuasion,  hath  caused  the  injury  to  be  done. 

XII.  All  righttoan  action  of  injury  may  be  lost  by  dissimula- 
tion ;  and  therefore,  if  a  man  takes  no  notice  of  an  injury  at  the 
time  in  which  he  receives  it,  he  cannot  afterwards,  although  he 
repents  of  his  former  behaviour,  commence  a  suit  on  account  of 
that  injury. 


T.  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


TITLE  VI. 

Of  Obligations  which  arise  from  (quasi  ex  delicti)  from  con- 
structive Criminality. 

IF  a  judge  make  a  suit  his  own,  by  giving  an  unjust  determi- 
nation, an  action  of  male-feasance  will  not  properly  lie  against  him  . 
but,  although  he  is  not  subject  to  an  action  of  male-feasance,  or 
of  contract,  yet,  as  he  hath  certainly  committed  a  fault,  although 
it  was  not  by  design,  but  through  imprudence  and  want  of  skill, 
he  may  be  saed  by  an  action  of  quasi-male-feasance  ;  and  must 
suffer  such  a  penalty,  which  seems  equitable  to  the  conscience  of 
a  superior  judge. 

L  Whoever  occupies  a  chamber,  from  whence  any  thing  hath 
been  either  thrown  or  spilt,  by  which  damage  is  done,  he  is  liable 
to  an  action  of  quasi-male-feasance;  and  it  is  not  material,  whether 
the  chamber  is  the  property  of  the  occupier  ;  whether  he  pays 
rent  for  it;  or  whether  he  inhabits  it  gratis;  and  the  reason  why 
such  occupier  is  not  suable  for  a  direct  male-feasance,  is,  because 
he  is  generally  sued  for  the  fault  of  another.  Any  man  is  also 
subject  to  the  same  action,  who  hath  hung  or  placed  any  thing  in 
a  public  road,  so  as  to  endanger  passengers  by  the  fall  of  it;  in 
which  case,  a  penalty  of  ten  aurei  is  appointed  ;  but,  when  any 
thing  hath  been  thrown  or  spilt,  the  action  is  always  for  the  double 
of  what  the  damage  amounts  to.  If  a  freeman  is  killed  by  acci- 
dent, the  penalty  is  fifty  aurei  ;  but,  if  he  only  receives  some 
hurt,  the  quantum  of  the  damage  is  at  th&  discretion  of  the  judge, 
who  ought  to  take  the  fee§  of  the  physicians  into  the  account, 
and  all  other  expences  attendant  upon  the  cure,  over  and  above 
the  time  which  the  patient  hath  lost  in  his  illness,  or  may  lose  by 
being  unable  to  pursue  his  business.  &\ 

II.  If  the  son  of  a  family  lives  separate  from  his  father,  and 
any  thing  is  either  thrown  or  spilt  from  his  apartment,  or  so  hung 
or  placed,  that  the  fall  of  it  may  damage,  it  is  the  opinion  of  Ju- 
lian, that  no  action  will  lie  against  the  father,  and  that  the  only 
son  can  be  sued.     The  same  rule  of  law  is  also  to  be   observed, 
in  regard  to  the  son  of  a  family,  who  hath  acted  as  a  judge,  and 
given  an  unjust  determination. 

III.  The  master  of  a  ship,  tavern,  or  inn,  is  liable  to  be  sued  for  a 
quasi-male-feasance,  on  account  of  every  damage,  or  theft,  done 
or  committed  in  any  of  these  places,  by  himself  or  his  servants: 
for  although  no  action,  either  of  direct  male-feasance,  or  of  con- 
tract, can  be  brought  against  the  master,  yet,  as  he  has,  in  some 
measure,  been  guilty  of  a  fault,  in  employing  dishonest  persons  as 
Jiis  servants,  he  is  therefore  subject  to  a  suit  for  quasi-male-fea- 

VOL.  1.  No.  6.  2  B 


.  THE  INSTITUTES. B.  iv. 

sance.  But,  in  all  these  cases,  the  action  given  is  an  action  upon 
the  fact,  which  may  be  brought  in  favour  of  an  heir,  but  not 
against  him. 


TITLE  VI. 
OF  ACTIONS. 

Definition. 

IT  now  remains,  that  we  should  treat  of  actions.  -An  action  ig 
nothing  more  than  the  right,  which  every  man  has,  of  bringing 
an  action  at  law  for  whatever  is  due  to  him. 

First  Division. 

I.  All  actions  in  general,  whether  they  are  determinable  before 
judges  or  arbitrors,  may  be  primarily  divided  into  two  kinds,  real 
and  personal;  for  the  plaintive  must  sue  the  defendant,  either  be- 
cause the  defendant  is  obligated  to  him  by  contract,  or  hath  been 
guilty  of  some  male-feasance ;  and,  in  this  case,  the  action  must 
be  personal,  in  which  the  plaintiff  alleges,  that  his  adversary  is 
bound  to  give,  or  to  do  something  for  his  service ;  or  some  other 
matter,  as  the  occasion  requires:  or  otherwise,  the  plaintiffmust  sue 
the  defendant,  on  account  of  some  corporeal  thing,  when  there  is 
no  obligation ;  in  which  case  the  action  must  be  real :   as  for  ex- 
ample, if  Sempronius  possesses  land,  which  Titius  affirms  to  be 
his  property,  the  other  denying  it,  Titius  must  bring  a  real  action 
against  Sempronius  for  the  recovery. 

Of  the  Confessory  and  Negatory  Action. 

II.  Also,  if  any  man  brings  an  action,  alleging,  that  he  has  a 
tight  to  the  usufruct  of  a  field,  or  house,  or  a  right  of  driving  his 
cattle,  prof  drawing  water  in  the  land  of  his  neighbour,  such  action 
is  denominated  real.    And  an  action  relating  to  the  rights  of  houses 
or  city  estates,  which  rights  are  called  services,  is  also  of  the  same 
kind  ;  as  when  a  man  commences  a  suit,  and  alleges,  that  he  has 
a  right  of  prospect,  a  right  to  raise  the  height  of  his  house,  a  right 
of  making  a  part  of  it  to  project,  or  a  right  of  laying  the  beams 
of  his  building  upon  his  neighbour's  walls.    There  are  also  con- 
trary actions  to  these,  which  relate  to  usufructs,  and  the  rights  of 
country  and  city  estates  ;   as  when  the  complainant  alleges,  that 
his  adversary  is  not  entitled   to   the  usufruct  of  a  particular 
ground,  or  to  the  right  of  passage,  &c.  &c.    These  actions  are 
also  real,  but  are  negative   in  their  nature,  and  cannot  there- 
fore be  used  in  regard  to   things  corporeal;  for,  in   respect   to 
things  corporeal,  the  agent,  or  plaintiff,  is  the  person  out  of  pos- 
session ;  for  a  possessor  can  bring  no  action ;  there  are  however, 


T.  vi;  OF  JUSTINIAN.  195 


many  cases,  in  which  a  possessor  maybe  obliged  to  act  the  part  of 
a  plaintiff;  but  we  refer  the  reader  to  the  books  of  the  digests. 
Of  Prcetorian  Civil  Actions. 

III.  The  actions,  of  which  we  have  made  mention,  and  all  ac- 
tions of  a  similar  nature,  are  derived  from  the  civil  law ;  but  the 
praetor,  by  virtue  of  his  jurisdiction,  hath  introduced  other  ac- 
tions, both  real  and  personal,  of  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  give 
some  examples  :  for  he  often  permits  a  real  action  to  be  brought, 
either  by  allowing  the  demandant  to  allege,  that  he  hath  acquired 
by  prescription,  what  he  hath  not  so  acquired  ;  or,  on  the  contrary 
by  permitting  a  former  possessor  to  allege,  that  his  adversary  hath 
not  acquired  by  prescription,  what,  in  reality,  he  hath  so  acquired. 

Of  the  PuLlician  Action. 

IV.  If  any  particular  thing,  belonging  to  one  man,  should  be 
delivered  in  trust  to  another,  that  it  might  be  deposited  with  him 
upon  some  just  account,  as  by  reason  of  a  purchase,  a  gift,  a  mar- 
riage, or  a  bequest,  and  it  should  so  happen,  that  such  trustee 
should  lose  the  possession,  before  he  hath  gained  a  property  in  the 
thing  possessed,  he  could  have  no  direct  action  for  the  recovery 
of  it :  inasmuch  as  real  actions  are  given  by  the  law  for  the  re- 
vindication of  those  things  only,  in  which  a  man  hath  vested  pro* 
perty  or  dominion.     But,  it  being  hard,  that  an  action  should  be 
wanting  in  such  a  case,  the  prastor  hath  supplied  one,  in  which 
the  person,  who  hath  lost  his  possession,  is  allowed  to  aver,  that 
he  hath  a  prescriptive  right  to  the  thing  in  question,  although  he 
hath  not  obtained  it ;   and  he  may  thus  recover  the  possession. 
This  action  is  called  actio   Publiciana,   because  it  was  first  in- 
stituted by  the  edict  of  Publicius  the  praetor. 

Of  the  Rescissory  Action. 

V.  On  the  contrary,  if  any  man,  whilst  he  is  abroad  in  the  ser- 
vice of  his  country,  or  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  should 
gain  a  prescriptive  title  to  a  thing,  which  belongs  to  another,  who 
was  not  abroad,  then  the  former  proprietor  is  permitted  at  any 
time,  within  a  year  after  the  return  of  the  possessor,  to  bring  an 
action  against  him,  the  prescriptive  title  being  rescinded,  and  the 
proprietor  being  allowed  to  allege,   that  the  possessor  hath   not 
effectually  prescribed,  and  that  therefore  the  thing  in  litigation  is 
his  own.     The  same   motive  of  equity   hath  also  induced  the 
prsetor  to  allow  the  use  of  this  species  of  action  to  certain  other 
persons,  as  we  may  learn  more  at  large  from  the  digests. 

Of  the  Paulinian  Action. 

VI.  If  a  debtor  disposes  of  any  thing,  by  delivering  it  to  some 
person  in  order  to  defraud  his  creditors,  the  creditors  are  then, 


106  THE  INSTITUTES  u, 


permitted,  notwithstanding  the  delivery,  to  bring  an  action  fop 
the  thing,  if  they  have  previously  obtained  the  sentence  of  the 
proper  magistrate,  for  putting  themselves  into  possession  ;  that  is, 
they  are  allowed  to  plead,  that  the  thing  was  not  delivered,  and 
of  course,  that  it  continues  to  be  a  part  of  their  debtor's  goods. 
Of  the  Servian  or  Hypothecary  Action. 

VII.  Also  the  action  Serviana,  and  the  action  quasi-Serviana, 
(which  is  also  called  hypothecary,)  both  take  their  rise  from  the 
praetor's  jurisdiction.     By  the  action  Serviana,  a  suit  may  be  com- 
menced for  the  stock  and  cattle  of  a  farmer,  which  are  obligated 
as  a  pledge  for  the  rent  of  the  ground  which  he  farms  of  his  land- 
lord.   The  action  quasi-Serviana  is  that,  by  which  a  creditor  may 
sue  for  a  thing  pledged  or  hypothecated  to  him  ;  and,  in  regard 
to  this  action,  there  is  no  difference  between  a  pledge  and  an  hy- 
potheque,  though  in  other  respects  they  differ  ;    for  by  the  term 
pledge  is  meant  that  which  hath  actually  been  delivered  to  a  cre- 
ditor, especially  if  the  thing  was  a  moveable  ;  and,  by  the  word 
hypotheque,  we  comprehend  what  is  obligated  to  a  creditor  by 
a  nude  agreement  only,  without  a  delivery. 

Of  the  Praetorian  personal  Actions. 

VIII.  Personal  actions  have  also  been  introduced  by  the  prae- 
tors, in  consequence  of  their  authority;  such  is  the  action  "depe- 
cunia  constituta ;"  which  much  resembles  that  called  "  reciptia  ;" 
which  we  have  now  taken  away  by  our  constitution,   as  un- 
necessary ;  and  whatever  advantageous  matter  it  contained,  we 
have  added  it  to  the  action  "  de  pecunia  constituta.*'  The  praetor* 
have  likewise  introduced  the  action  concerning  the  peculium  of 
slaves,  and  the  sons  of  families;  and  also  the  actions,  in  which 
the  only  question  is,  whether  the  plaintiff  hath  made  oath  of  his 
debt;  they  have  likewise  introduced  many  others. 

Of  Money  constituted. 

IX.  A  suit  may  be  commenced  by  the  action  "  de  pecunia  con- 
stituta,"  against  any  person  who  hath  engaged  to  pay  money, 
either  for  himself  or  another,  without   stipulation ;  but,  when 
there  is  a  stipulation,  the  praetorian  action  is  not  wanted  ;  for  the 
performance  of  the  promise  may  be  inforced  by  the  civil  law. 

Of  the  Peculium. 

X.  The  praetor  hath  also  given  actions  "depeculio" against  fa- 
thers and  masters,  inasmuch  as  they  are  not  legally  bound  by  the 
contracts  of  their  children  and  slaves:  for  it  is  but  equity  that  pa- 
rents and  masters  should  be  condemned  to  pay  to  the  extent  of  a 
peculium,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  patrimony,  and  separate  es- 
tate of  a  son,  a  daughter,  or  a  slave. 


i\  vi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  W7 

Of  Action  on  Oath. 

XI.  Also  if  any  man,  at  the  prayer  or   request  of  the  adverse 
party,  makes  oath,  that  the  debt  which  he  sues  for  is  unpaid  and 
due  to  him,  the  praetor  most  justly  indulges  him   with  an  action 
upon  the  fact;  in  which  no  inquiry  is  made  whether  the  debt  is 
due,  but  whether  the  oath  hath  been  taken. 

Of  Penal  Actions. 

XII.  The  praetors  have  also  introduced  a  great  number  of  pe- 
nal actions,  by  virtue  of  their  authority.     But,  to  mention  some 
only  out  of  many,  they  have   provided,  for  instance,  an  action 
against  him   who  hath  wilfully  damaged  or  erased  an  edict; 
against  an  emancipated   son,  or  a  freed-man,   who  hath  com- 
menced a  suit  against  his  parent  or  patron,  without  a   previous 
permission  from  the  proper  magistrate;  and  also  against  any  per- 
son, who,  by  force  or  fraud,  hath  hindered  another  from  appear- 
ing to  the  process  of  a  court  of  justice.     But  these  are  only  some 
instances  out  of  a  great  number,  which  might  be  produced, 

Of  prejudicial  Actions* 

XIII.  Prejudicial  actions  are   also  real ;   such  are  those,  by 
which  it  is  inquired,  whether  a  man  is  born  free,  or  made  free; 
whether  he  is  a  slave  or  a  bastard.     But  of  these  actions,  that 
only  proceeds  from  the  civil  law  by  which  it  is  inquired,  whether 
a  man  is  free  born  ;  the  rest  all  take  their  rise  from  the  praetor's 
jurisdiction. 

Of  Conduction. 

XIV.  Actions  being  thus  divided  into  real  and  personal,  it  is 
certain  that  a  man  cannot  sue    for  his  own   property  by  a  con- 
diction,  or  a  personal  action   in  the  following  form  ;  viz.   4<  If  it 
appears  that  the  defendant  ought  to  GIVE   it  me:"  for  the  act  of 
giving  implies  the  conferring  of  property,  and  therefore  that  which 
is  the  property  of  the  plaintiff  can  never  be  understood  to  be  given 
to  him,  or  to  become  more  his  own  than  it  already  is.    But,  not- 
withstanding this,  in  order  to  shew  a  detestation  for  thieves  and 
robbers,  and  to  increase  the  number  of  actions  which  may  be 
^brought  against  them,  it  hath  been  determined,  that,  besides  the 
double  and  quadruple  penalty  to  which  they  are  liable,  they  may 
be  pursued  by  a  condiction  for  the  thing  taken,  in  the  very  form 
before  recited,  if  it  appears  that  they  ought  to  GIVE  it.     And  this 
wallowed,  althpugh  the  party  injured  may  also  bring  a  real  ac- 
tion against  them,  by  which  he  may  demand  the  thing  taken  as 
his  own. 

Of  the  Names  of  Actions. 

XV.  Real  actions  are  called  vindications;  and  personal  actions.. 


198 THE  INSTITUTES B.  ir. 

in  which  it  is  intended,  that  something  ought  to  be  done  or 
given,  are  called  condictions;  for  the  word  condicere  was  in  our 
old  language  of  the  same  import  with  denuntiare  to  denounce :  but 
the  term  condiction  is  now  improperly  used  to  denote  a  personal 
action,  by  which  the  plaintiff  contends,  that  something  ought  ta 
be  given  to  him ;  for  denunciations  are  not  in  use. 
Second  Division. 

XVI.  Actions  are  also  further  divided  into  those  which  are  given, 
for  the  sake  of  obtaining  the  very  thing  in  dispute;  into  those 
•which  are  given  for  the  penalty  only;   and,  lastly,   into  mixed 

actions,  which  are  given  for  the  recovery  both  of  the  thing  and 

, 
the  penalty. 

Of  Actions  of  Damages. 

XVII.  All  real  actions  are  given  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing 
in  litigation ;  and   almost  all  the  personal  actions,  which  arise 
from  a  contract,  are  also  given  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing  it- 
self; as  the  action  for  a  mutuum,  a  commodatum,  or  on  account  of 
a  stipulation;  also  the  action  on  account  of  a  deposit,  a  mandate, 
partnership,  buying  arid  selling,  letting  and  hiring.     But  when  a 
suit  is  commenced  for  a  thing  deposited  by  reason  of  a  riot,  a 
fire,  or  any  other  calamity,  the  praetor  always  gives  an  action  fora 
double  penalty,  besides  the  thing  deposited,  if  the  suit  is  brought 
against  the  depository  himself,  or  against  his  heir,  for  fraud  ;  in 
which  case  the  action  is  mixed. 

Of  Actions  for  Penalty. 

XVIII.  In  cases  of  male-feasance,  some  actions  are  given  for 
the  penalty  only,  and  some  both  for  the  thing  and  the  penalty ; 
and  these  are  therefore  called  mixed  actions.     But,  in  an  action 
of  theft,  whether  manifest  or  not  manifest,  nothing  more  is  sued 
for  than  the  penalty,  which,  in  manifest  theft  as  quadruple,  and, 
in  theft  not  manifest,  double :  for  the  owner  may  recover  by  a  se- 
parate action  whatever  hath  been  stolen  from  him,  if  he  alleges 
that  the  ihing  stolen  is  his  own;  and  he  is  intitled  to  this  action, 
not  only  against  the  thief,  but  against  any  other  person  who  is  in 
possession  of  his  property.     The  thief  may  also  be  sued  by  a  con- 
diction,  or  personal  action,  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing  stolen. 

Of  mixed  Actions. 

XIX.  An  action  for  goods  taken  by  force  is  a  mixed  action  r 
because  the  value  of  whatever  is  included  under  the  quadruple 
value  to  be  recovered  by  the  action  ;   and  thus  the  penalty  is  but 
triple.     The  action,  introduced  by  the  law  Aquilia,  on  account  of 
damage  injuriously  done,  is  also  a  mixed  action  ;  not  only  when 
it  is  given  for  double  value  against  a  man  denying  the  fact,  but 


.*,  vi,  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


comeAimes,  when  the  action  is  only  for  single  value;  as  when  a 
man  hath  killed  a  slave,  who  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  lame, 
or  wanted  an  eye,  but  had  within  the  year,  previous  to  his  de- 
cease, been  free  from  any  defect,  and  of  great  price  ;  for  in  this 
case  the  defendant  is  obliged  to  pay  as  much  as  the  slave  was 
worth  at  any  time  within  the  y«ar  preceding  his  death,  according 
to  what  has  already  been  observed,  b.  4.  t.  3.  A  mixed  action 
may  also  be  brought  against  those,  who  have  delayed  .to  deliver 
a  legacy,  or  gift  in  trust,  given  for  the  benefit  of  a  church,  or  any 
other  holy  place,  till  they  have  been  called  before  a  magistrate 
for  that  purpose  :  for.  then  they  are  compelled  to  deliver  up  the 
thing,  or  to  pay  the  money  bequeathed,  and  also  the  value  of  as 
much  more,  by  way  of  penalty;  and  thus  they  are  condemned  to 
pay  the  double  of  what  was  due. 

Of  other  mixed  Actions. 

XX.  There  are  also  some  actions,  which  are  of  a  mixed  nature, 
by  being,  in   effect,   as   well  real  as  personal;  of  this  sort  is  the 
action  families  erciscundce,  which  may  be  brought  by  coheirs  for 
the  partition  of  their  inheritance;  such  also  is  the  action  de  coin- 
muni  dividundo,  given  for  the  division  of  any  particular  thing  or 
things,  which,  exclusive  of  an  inheritance,  are  in  common  :  and 
likewise  the  action  finium  regundorem,  which  takes  place  among 
those,  whose  estates  are  contiguous.    And,  in  these  three  actions, 
it  is  wholly  in  the  power  of  the  judge  to  give  the  ground,  or  thing 
in  dispute,  to  either  of  the  parties  litigant,  and  then  to  oblige  that 
party,  if  necessity  so  requires,  to  recompense  his  adversary,  by 
paying  him  a  sum  certain,  in  .amends  for  any  inequality  in  the 
adjudication. 

Third  Division. 

XXI.  All  actions  are  for  the  single,  double,  triple,  or  quad- 
ruple value  of  the  thing  in  litigation  ;  for  no  action  extends  farther. 

Of  Actions  for  the  simple  Value. 

XXII.  The  single  value  is  sued  for,  when  an  action  is  given 
upon  a  stipulation,  a  loan,  a  mandate,  the  contract  of  buying  and 
selling,  letting  and  hiring;   and  also  upon  other  very  numerous 
accounts. 

For  double. 

XXIII.  The  double  value  is  sued  for,  in  an  action  of  theft  not 
manifest,  of  injury,  by  virtue  of  the  law  Aquilia,  and  sometimes 
an  action  of  deposit.     The  double  value  is  likewise  sued  for,  in 
an  action  brought,  on  account  of  a  slave  corrupted,  against  him, 
by  whose  advice  such   a  slave  hath  fled  from  his  mater,  growij 
disobedient,  luxurious,  or  become  in  any  mannerthe  worse;  and, 


fnTfiis  action,  a,n  estimation  is  to  be  made  of  wbatever.tbine«  tHe 

>!avo  hath  stolen   from   his  "master,  before  his  flight.     An  action 

for  the'detentKin  of  a legacv,   left  to   an  holy  place,  is  also  give^i 

nati3*  Afli  m.  ZB  .ujitiasa  ilul  £fli  Y3CL&1 ^3Sl8w&Q$P  9a  3*"' 

:  nave-betore  remarKeu,  ,  _  ..  . 

489imftm  fteiulc 

o^\p  z&ofokTO    .          , 

rou^ht  for  triple  value,  when  anv-l>er- 

DOO1MO  92OHJ  OJDl  8i  *gHOIJ3B  lO^jnOlelY/Jj   uIll/OI  3lT^     ^11*  /  -'r** 

cqn  inserts  a  greater  sum,  than  is  due  to  him,  in  the  libel,  of  _coa- 
"vention,  to  the  "intent,  that  the  officers  of  any  court  may  exact  a 
larger  fee,  or  sportule,  from  the  defendant ;  in  which  case  the  de- 
fendant may  obtain  the  triple  value  of  the  extraordinary  fee  from 
the  plaintiff,  including  the  fee  in  the  triple  value.    The  fees  of  offi- 
cers are  regulated  by  our  constitution,  and  it  is  not  to  be"  doubted, 
>t  that  the  action,  called  condictio  t.r   legc,  may  be'  given   by 

•virtue  of  that  ordinance.  « 

••-¥&  quadruple. 

XXV.  A  suit  may  be  commenced  for  quadruple  or  fourfold 
value,  by  an  action  for  theft  manifest,  by  an  action  for  putting  a 
nian  in  fear,  and  by  an  action  on  account  of  money,  given  to 
bring  on  a  litigious  Suit  against  some  third  person,  or  on  account 
of  money  given  to  desist  from  it.  A  conduction  ex  lege,  for  the 
quadruple  value;  arises  also  from  our  constitution  against  "those 
officers. of  courts  of  justice,  who  demand  any  thing  from  the  party 
defendant,  contrary  to  the  regulations  of  the  said  constitution. 


StAdhMon  of  Actim,.'"*"?**. 

r«^t-  -I  ™i    fiOliftiilflil?  Ml  UDtA.)*  fiij     OJ  j£33WO(2  IDiiiO  VflBfH  lO 

XXVI.  But  an  action  of  theft  not  manifest,  and  an  action  on 
account  of  a  slave  corrupted,  differ  from  the  others,  of  which  we 
'have  spoken,  in  that  they  always  enforce  a  condemnation  in 
double  the  value  ;  but  in  an  action,  given  by  the  law  Aquilia  for 
'an  injury  done,  arid  sofnetimes  in  an  action  of  deposit,  the  double 
value  may  be  exacted  in  case  of  a  denial  ;  yet  whenever  the  party 
defendant  makes  a  confession,  then  the  single  value  is  all,  which 
can  be  recovered.  But,  when  a  demand  is  made  by  an  action  for 

'f*L*»*fpnf  I*''  -it  "foi  AJI>  fl*%  tffsi? 

a  legacy  to  pious  uses,  due  10  any  holy  place  or  society,  the 
penalty  is  not  only  doubled  by  the  denial  of  the  defendant,  but 
%i«o  by  any  delay  of  payment,  which  may  be  adjudged  -'to  have 
.fcJveh  %a;  just  cause  for  citing  the  defendant  before  a  magistrate: 
but,  if  the  legacy  is  confessed  and  paid,  before  any  citation  issues 
at  the  command  of  the  judge,  the  party  complainant  must  rest 
satisfied  with  the  single  value. 

Second  Subdivision. 
II.-An  action  for  putting  aman  in  fear  differs.  also'  from 


. 

ather  actions  in  qnadruplum,  because  it  is   tacitly  implied  in  the 
of  this  action,  that  the  party,  who  hath  obeyed  the  com. 

OS. 


Y.VI.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 201 

mand  of  the  judge  or  magistrate,  in  restoring  the  things  taken,  may 
be  dismissed;  for,  in  allotheractions  for  the  fourfold  value,  every 
man  must  be  condemned  to  pay  the  full  penalty,  as  in  the  notion 
of  theft  manifest. 

Of  Actions  of  good  faith. 

XXVIII.  The  fourth  division  of  actions  is  into  those  of  good 
faith,  and  those  of  strict  right.  Those  of  good  faith  are  the  fol- 
lowing ;  viz.  actions  of  buying  and  selling,  letting  and  hiring  ;  of 
affairs  transacted,  of  mandate,  deposit,  partnership,  tutelage,  loan, 
mortgage;  of  the  partition  of  an  inheritance,  and  of  the  division  of 
any  particular  thing  or  things,  which  belong  in  common  to  diverse 
persons;  also  actions  in  prescribed  words,  which  are  either  esti- 
tiiatbry,  or  derived  from  commutation;  and  lastly  that  action,  by 
virtue  of  which  we  demand  an  inheritance:  for  although  it  hath 
long  been  doubtful  to  what  class  this  action  belonged  ;  yet  it  is 
now  clearly  determined  by  our  constitution,  that  the  demand  of 
an  inheritance  is  to  be  numbered  among  the  actions  of  good  faith. 
*ju«  Of  Marriage-Portion  Action. 

-  XXIX.  The  action,  called  rei  uxorice,  which  was  given  for 
the  recovery  of  a  marriage  portion,  was  formerly  numbered  among 
the  actions  of  good  faith;  but  when,  upon  finding  the  action  of 
stipulation  to  be  more  full  and  advantageous,  we  abrogated  the 
action  rei  uxoriae,  and  transferred  all  its  effects,  with  the  addition 
of  many  other  powers,  to  the  action  of  stipulation,  which  is  given 
on  account  of  marriage  portions,  we  then  not  only  thought,  that 
this  action  of  stipulation,  as  far  as  it  related  to  marriage  por- 
tions, deserved  to  be  numbered  with  actions  of  good  faith,  but 
we  also  added  to  it,  by  implication,  the  full  powers  of  an  action 
of  hypotheque ;  and  we  have  likewise  judged  it  proper,  that  wo- 
men, in  whose  sole  behalf  we  enacted  our  constitution,  should  be 
preferred  to  all  other  creditors  by  mortgage,  whenever  they  them- 
selves sue  for  their  marriage  portions. 

Of  the  Discretion  of  the  Judge. 

XXX.  In  all  actions  of  good  faith  a  full  power  is  given  to  the 
judge  of  calculating,  according  to  the  rules  of  justice  and  equity, 
how  much  ought  to  be  restored  to  the  plaintiff;  and.  of  course, 
when  the  plaintiff  is  found  to  be  indebted  to  the  defendant  in  a 
less  sum,  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  judge  to  allow  a  compensa- 
tion, and  to  condemn  the  defendant  in  the  payment  of  the  dif- 
ference ;  and,  even  in  actions  of  strict  right,  the  emperor  Marcus 
introduced  a  compensation,  by  opposing  an  exception  of  fraud: 
but  we  have  extended  compensations  much  farther  by  our  consti- 
tution, when  the  debt  of  the  defendant  is  evident;  so  t^at  actions 

VOL.  I.  No.  6\  2  C 


t02  THE  INSTITUTES 


of  strict  right,  whether  real,  personal,  or  of  whatever  kind  they 
are,  may  be  diminished  by  compensation  ;  except  only  an  actiou 
of  deposit,  against  which  we  have  not  judged  it  proper  to  permit 
any  compensation  to  be  alleged,  lest  the  pretence  of  compensa- 
tion should  give  a  colour  aud  encouragement  to  fraud.  ^971 
Of  arbitrary  Actions. 

XXXI.  There  are  also  some  actions  which  we  call   arbitrary, 
because  they  depend  entirely  upon  the  arbitration  of  the  judge  ; 
for,  in  these,  if  the  party  does  not  obey  the  legal  command  of  the 
court,  by  exhibiting  whatever  is  required,  by  restoring  the  thing 
in  litigation,  or  by  paying  the  value  of  it,  or  by  giving  up  a  slave 
in  consequence  of  an  action  of  male-feasance,  the  judge  oughtim- 
mediately  to  proceed  to  condemnation  by  his  definitive  sentence. 
Of  these  arbitrary  actions  some  are  real  and  some  personal  :  some 
are  real,  as  the  action  Publiciana,  Servians,  and  quasi-Serviana, 
which  is  likewise  called  hypothecary:  others  are  personal,  as 
those  by  which  a  suit  is  commenced  on  account  of  something 
done  by  force,  fear,  or  fraud  :  or  on  account  of  something  which 
was  promised  to  be  paid  or  restored  in  a  certain  place  ;  and  the 
action  ad  exlubendum,  which  was  given  to  the  intent,  that  some* 
thing  particular  should  be  exhibited,  is  also  of  the  same   kind: 
and,  in  all  these  and  the  like  actions,  the  judge  has  full  power  to 
determine,  according  to  the  equity  and  nature  of  the  thing  sued 
fur,  in  what  manner  and  proportion  the  plaintiff  ought  to  receive 
satisfaction. 

Fifth  Division. 

XXXII.  A  judge  ougbt  always  to  take  as  much  care  as  pos- 
sible so  to  frame  his  sentence,  that  it  may  be  given  for  a  thing  or 
sum  certain  ;    although   the  claim  upon  which  the  sentence  is 
founded  may  be  for  an  uncertain  sum  or  quantity. 

Of  the  Claim  of  more  than  is  due. 

XXXIII.  Formerly,  if  a  plaintiff  claimed  more  in  his  libel  than 
was  due  or  belonged  to  him,  he  failed  in  his  cause  ;  thatife,  he  even 
lost  that  which  really  did  belong  to  him;  nor  was  it  easy  for  him 
to  be  restored  to  it  by  the  praetor,  unless  he  was  under  the  age  of 
25  years  :  for  in  this,  as  well  as  in  other  cases,  it  was  usual  to  aid 
minors,  if  it  appeared,  upon  examination,  that  the  error  was  ow- 
ing to  their  youth  ;  and  whenever  an  error  was  such,  that  one  of 
the  most  knowing  of  men  might  have  been  led  into  it,  then  even 
persons  of  full  age  might  have  been  aided  by  the  magistrate  :  as 
for  example,  if  a  legatee  had  demanded  his  whole  legacy,  and  co- 
dicils were  afterwards  produced,  by  which  a  part  of  it  was  re- 
voked, or  new  legacies  bequeathed  to  other  persons,  so  that  the 


OF  JUSTINIAN!  203 


plaintiff  appeared  to  have  demanded  more  than  three-  fourths  of 
bis  legacy:  because  it  was  subject  to  a  diminution  by  the  law/a?- 
c/rf/a;  yet,  in  such  a  case,  the  legatee  would  be  relieved,  notwith- 
standing the  excess  of  his  demand.  It  is  here  necessary  to  b% 
observed,  that  a  man  may  demand  more  than  what  is  due  to  him, 
in  four  several  respects,  viz.  in  respect  to  the  thing  itself;  to 
time  ;  to  place  ;  and  to  the  cause.  In  respect  to  the  thing  itself; 
as  when  the  plaintiff,  instead  of  ten  aurei,  which  are  due  to  him", 
demands  twenty;  or  if,  when  he  is,  in  reality,  the  owner  but  of 
part  of  some  particular  thing,  he  claims  the  whole  as  his  own,  or 
a  greater  share  of  it  than  he  is  entitled  to.  In  respect  to  time,  as 
when  the  plaintiff  makes  his  demand  before  the  day  of  payment, 
or  before  the  time  of  the  performance  of  a  condition  ;  for,  as  h« 
who  does  not  pay  so  soon  as  he  ought,  is  always  understood  to 
pay  less  than  he  ought,  so,  by  a  parity  of  reasoning,  whoever  com- 
mences a  suit  prematurely  demands  more  than  his  due.  In  re- 
spect to  place  :  as  when  any  person  requires,  that  what  was  sti- 
pulated to  be  given  or  delivered  to  him  at  a  certain  place,  should 
bd  given  or  delivered  to  him  at  some  other  place,  without  taking 
any  notice  in  his  libel  of  the  place  specified  iirthe  stipulation; 
as  if  Titius,  for  example,  should  stipulate  in  these  words:  "  Do 
you  promise  to  give  such  a  particular  thing  at  Ephesus?"  antt 
should  afterwards  declare  simply  in  his  libel,  that  the  same  tning 
ought  to  be  given  to  him  at  Rome  :  for  Titius  would  thus  be  un- 
derstood to  demand  more  than  his  due,  by  endeavouring  to  de- 
prive his  debtor  of  the  advantage  which  he  might  have  had  in. 
paying  his  creditor  at  Ephesus.  And,  it  is  upon  this  account, 
that  an  arbitrary  action  is  given  to  him  who  would  demand  pay- 
ment in  another  place  than  that  which  was  agreed  upon-,  for,  in 
that  action,  the  advantage  which  might  have  accrued  to  the 
debtor,  by  paying  his  debt  in  the  place  stipulated,  is  always  taken 
into  consideration  at  the  discretion  -of  the  judge.  Threathran- 
tage  is  generally  found  the  greatest  in  m  etch  arid  i  se  ;  as  in  wine, 
oil,  corn,  &c.  which  in  different  places,  bear  different  prices; 
and,  indeed,  money  itself  is  not  lent  every  where  at  the  same  in*. 
terest.  But  if  a  man  would  sue  the  performance  of  a  stipulation 
at  Ephesus,  or  at  any  other  place,  where  it  was  agreed,  that  the 
stipulation  should  be  performed,  he  may  legally  commence  la*$ 
suit  by  a  pure  action,  that  is  without  mentioning  the  place  ;  and 
this  the  praetor  allows  of,  inasmuch  as  the  debtor  does  not  lo*e 
any  advantage.  Next  to  him,  who  demands  more  than  his  due, 
in  regard  to  place,  is  be,  who  demands  more  than  his  due,  in  re- 
gard to  the  cause;  as  for  instance,  if  Titius  stipulates  thus  with 


THE  INSTITUTES  .  _  B.V. 


Sempronius  ;—"  do  you  promise  to  give  either  your  slave  Stichus  i 
or  ten  aurei  ?"  and  then  demands  from  Sempronius,  either  the  slave 
specially,  or  the  money  specially  :  for  in  this  case  Titius  would 
be  adjudged  to  have  demanded  more  than  his  due,  the  right  of  elec- 
tion being  in  Sempronius,  by  whom  the  promise  was  made;  and 
therefore,  when  Titius  sues  either  for  the  money  specially,  or  for 
the  slave,  he  deprives  the  adverse  party  of  the  power  of  election,; 
and  betters  his  own  condition,  by  making  that  of  his  adversary 
the  worse  :  and   it  is  upon  this  account,    that  an  action  has  been 
given,  by  which  the  party  agent  may  make  his  demand  conformable 
to  the  stipulation,  and  claim  either  the  slave,  or  the  money.     And 
farther,  if  a  man  should  stipulate  generally,  that  wine,  pu*pie,  or 
a  slave,  should  be  given  him,  and  should  afterwards  Sue  for  the 
wine  of  Campania,  the  purple  of  Tyre,  or  the  slave  Stichus  ia 
particular,  he  would  then  be  adjudged  to  have  demanded  A^gre 
than  his  due;  for  the  power  of  election  would  thus  be  taken  from 
the  adverse  party,  who  was  not  bound  by   the  stipulation  to  pay 
the  thing  demanded  ;  and  although,  in  any   of  these  cases,  the 
thing  sued  for  should  be  of  little  or  no  value,  yet  the  demandant 
would  be  thought  to  claim  more  than  his  due  ;  because  it  ifcjftftffi^ 
easier  for  the  debtor  to  pay  the  thing  stipulated,  aUbtf&gljsiJ/ffija^ 
be  of  greater  value  than  the  thing  demanded.  —  Sue<tKV^%t^jl##fn 
according  to  the  ancient  practice,   in  regard  to  an  over-ueii;and, 
viz.  that  the  demandant  should  lose  even  that,  which  was  really 
due  to  him.     But  this  law  has  been  greatly  restrained  .by  the  con- 
stitution  of  Zeno  the  emperor,  and  by  our  own  ;  for,  if  more  than 
is  4ue  is  demanded  in  regard  to  time*  the  judge  must  be  directed 
in  his  proceeding  by  the  Constitution  of  that  emperor  of  glorious 
memory  ;    but,  if  more  is  demanded,  in  respect  to  quantity,  or  on 
any  other  account,  then  the  loss  suffered  by  him,  upon.  whom  the 
demand  is  made,  must  be  recompensed,  as  we  have  before  de- 
clared, by  the  condemnation  -ji  the  parly  agent  in  triple  damages. 
Of  the  Claim  of  Jess  than  is  due. 

XXXIV.  If  a  plaintiff  sues  for  less,  than  what  he  has  a   claim 
to,  dema  jdu.  %  frr  irstance,  only  five  aurei,  when  ten  are  due;  or 
the  moiety  of  an  estate,  when  the  whole  belongs  to  him;  he  acts 
safely  b;  this  method,  for  the  judge,  in  consequence  of  Zeno's 
constitution,  may  nevertheless  condemn  the  adverse  party,  under 
the  same  process,  to  the  payment  or  delivery  of  all,  which  ap- 
pears of  right  to  belong  to  the  plaintiff.  .bayis- 

1o  ««•«.»  B9fc,.  Of  an  Error. 

XXXV.  .  VV  hen  a  plaintiff  demands  one  thing  instead  of  another, 
he  risks  nothihg"by  Hie  mistake,'  which  he  is  allowed  to 


OF  JUSTINIAN  .....  205 

-...  '-  ---  :  ---  ~  •        - 


tbe  same  process^  as  jf  a  iitigant  should  demand 
the  slave  Erptes,  instead  of  the  slave  Stichus,  or  should  claim,  as 
due  by  testament,  what  is  found  to  be  due  upon  a  stipulation. 
3?b  lo  JrtSiT  *  Sixth  Division.     Of  Peculiqifa^ 

XXXVI.  There  are  also  some  actions,  by  which  we  do  not 
always  sue  for  the  whole,  which  is  due  to  us  ;   but  for  the  whole, 
or  less,  than  the  whole,  as  it  proves  to  be  most  expedient;    thus, 
when  a  suit  is  brought  against  the  peculiurn  of  a  son  or  a  slave,  ff 
the  pscuiium  is  sufficient  to  answer  the  demand,  the  father  ot 
master  must  be  condemned  to  pay  the  whole  debt  ;    but,  if  the 
peculium  is  not  sufficient,  the  judge  can  condemn  the  defendants 
only  to  the  extent  of  its  value.     We  will  hereafter  explain,  in  its 

proper  place,  what  we  mean  by  the  term  peculium. 
F    K     F  J  '  ^'ijr  i»d  bfcr^v.^a^ 

Of  the  Restitution  of  Dower. 

I?  S^ftfW 

XXXVII.  Also,  if  a  woman  commences  a  suit  for  the  restitu- 

.nj  .•  iirr 

tion  of  her  marriage  portion,  the  man  must  be  condemned  to  payj 
as  far  as  he  is  able;  i.  e.  as  far  as  his  income  or  faculties  will  per- 
mit: and  therefore,  if  the  portion  demanded  and  the  faculties  of 
the  man  are  equal,  he  must  be  adjudged  to  satisfy  .  the  whot§"' 
demand  ;  but,  if  his  faculties  are  less  than  the,  claim,  he  rfiusl 
neverthelss  be  condemned  to  pay  as  much  as  he  is  able.  But  UK? 
claim  of  a  woman  may  in  this  case  be  lessened  by  a  retention  ;  fort 
the  husband  is  permitted  to  retain  an  equivalent  for  whatever  he 
hath  necessarily  expended  upon  the  estate  given  with  his  wife^aif 
a  marriage  portion;  but  this  will  fully  appear  by  a^jperusat  of  tfi^ 
digests,  to  which  the  reader  is  referred^,,  ^  ^ 

Of  Actions  against  ^f^fc^-b  fc  ^ 

XXXVIII.  And,  if  any  person  commences  a  su.it  agajnst  his- 
parent  or  patron,   or  if  one  partner  sues  another,  the  plaintiff  car^ 
by  no  means  obtain  sentence  fora  greater  sum,  than.  his.  adversary 
is  able  to  pay;    and  the  same  is  to  be  observed,   when  a  donor  ^ 
sued  on  account  of  bis  donation.  3dJ  ^  Jbaisb 

Of  Compensations. 

XXXIX.  When  a  compensation  is  alleged  by  the  dej^nd^nt,  it 
generally  happens,  that  the  plaintiff  recovers  less  than  his  demand, 


for  it  is  in  the  power  of  the  judge,  as  we  have  before  declared,  to 
make  an  equitable  deduction  from  trie  demand  of  the  plaintiff  of 
whatever  he  owes  to  the  defendant,  and  to  condemn  the  defendant 


to  the  payment  only  of  the  remainder;   as  it  hath  already  been 
observed;  , 

Of  the  Creditors  of  Insolvents. 

XL.  Creditors  also,  to  whom  a  debtor  hath  made  a  cession  of 
hi*  goods,  may  afterwards,  if  he  hath  gained  any  considerable 


THE  INSTITUTES  a. 


acquisition,  bring  a  fresh  suit  against  him,  for  as  much  as  he  rt 
able  to  pay,  but  not  more;  for  it  would  be  inhuman  to  condemn 
a  man  in  solidum,  who  hath  already  been  deprived  of  his  whole 
fortune. 


TITLE  VII. 

OF  BUSINESS  DONE  WITH  THOSE  UNDEII  POWER. 
WE  have  already  made  mention  of  the  action,  by  which  a  suit 
may  be  brought  against  the  peculium,  or  separate  estate  of  a  son 
or  a  slave:  but  it  is  now  necessary  to  speak  of  it  more  fully,  and 
also  of  some  other  actions,  which  are  given  on  account  of  children 
and  slaves  against  their  parents  and  masters.  But,  inasmuch  as 
the  law  is  almost  the  same,  whether  an  affair  is  transacted  with  a 
slave,  or  with  him,  who  is  under  the  power  of  his  parent,  we 
will  therefore,  to  avoid  being  prolix,  treat  only  of  slaves  and  their 
masters,  leaving  what  we  say  of  them  to  be  understood  also  of 
parents  and  children  under  power;  for,  whenever  there  is  any 
thing  peculiar  to  be  observed,  in  regard  to  children  and  parents, 
we  intend  to  point  it  out  separately. 

Of  what  is  done  by  Command  of  the  Master. 

I.  If  any  business  is  negotiated  by  a  slave,  who  acts  by  the  com- 
mand  of  his  master,  the  praetor  will  give  an  action   against  the 
master  for  the  whole  value  of  the  transaction  ;  for  whoever  makes 
a  contract  with  a  slave,  is  presumed  to  have  done  it  upon  a  con- 
fidence in  the  master. 

Of  the  Ejcercitory  and  Institory  Actions. 

II.  The  praetor  also  gives  two  other  actions  in  solidum  upon  the 
same  motive ;  the  one  of  which  is  called  exefcitoria,  the  other 
institoria.     The  action  exercitoria   takes  place,  when  a  master 
hath  constituted   his  slave  to  be  the  commander  of  a  vessel,  and 
some  contract  hath  been  entered  into  with  such  slave  merely  up- 
on that  account    and  this  action  is  named  exercitoria,  because  he 
to  whom  the  profits  of  a  ship  or  vessel  appertain,  is  called  exer- 
citor.     The  action  institoria  is  made  use  of,  when  a  master  hath 
given  his  slave  the  management  of  a  ship,  or  committed  any  par- 
ticular affair  to  his  direction,  by  which  some  one  hath  been  in- 
duced  to  enter   into    a  contract    with    such    slave;    and    this 
action  is  called  institoria,  because  all  persons,  to  whom  a  negoti- 
ation is  committed,  are  denominated  institores.     The  praetor  hath 
likewise  been  induced,  by  the  same  equity,  to  give  these  two  ac- 
tions against  any  man  who  employs  a  free  person,  or  the  slave  of 
another,  in  the  management  of  a  ship,  a  warehouse,  or  any  par* 
ticular  affaift 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


Of  the  Tributary  Action. 

III.  The  praetor  hath  also  introduced  another  action  called  tribu- 
toria,  or  tributary  ;•  for  'if  -a  'slave,  without  the  command,  but 
with  the  knowledge  of  his  master,  traffics  with  the  product  of  his 
peculium,  and  persons  are  thus  induced  to  contract  with  him, 
the  praetor  ordains,  that  the  merchandize,  or  money,  arising  from 
his  trafi&c^  shall  be  distributed  between  the  master,  (if  he  has  any 
just  claimd)  and  the  rest  of  the  creditors,  in  a  ratable  proportion; 
and  the  master  himself  is  always  permitted  to  make  the  distribu- 
tion; but,  if  any  creditor  complains  that  too  small  a  share  hath 
been  apportioned  to  him,  the  praetor  will  allow  him  to  use  the 
before-named  action,  which  is  called  tributoria,  on  account  of 
the  distribution.     ;,   lijsljv  ««:  .;ioth; 

Of  the  Action  respecting  the  Peculium. 

IV,  The  action  concerning  a  peculium,  and  things  converted  to 
the  profit  of  the  master  of  a  slave,  hath  likewise  been  introduced 
by  the  praetor;  for  although  a  contract  hath  been  entered  into  by 
a  slave,  without  the  consent  of  his  master,  yet,  where  the  money 
arising  from  it  is  converted  to  ,the  benefit  of  such  master,  the 
master  ought  to  be  answerable  for  the  performance  of  it;  and, 
even  although  the  master  should  receive  no  emolument  from  the 
transaction,-  yet  it  is  right,  that  he  should   be   answerable  for  as 
much  as  the  peculium  of  his  slave  is  found  to  be  worth.     Bu^  ; 
to  be  more  explicit,  we  understand,  that,  whenever  money,  or 
any  other  thing,  is  necessarily  used  or  expended  by  a  slave  upoi^ 
his  master's  affairs,  it  is  a  conversion  of  it  to  his  benefit  ;  as  for  ex>- 
ample,  if  a  slave,  who  bath  borrowed  money,  should  pay  the  dsbt? 
pf  his  master,  repair  his  buildings,  purchase  an  estate,  provision, 
or  any  other  thing,  which  is  useful  :  and  therefore,  if  out  of  tea 
aurei,  borrowed  by  a  slave,  he  should  pay  only  five  to  bis  masterif  / 
creditors,  and  squander  the  rest,  the  master  would  nevertheless 
be  condemned  to  the  payment  in  solidum  of  the«five  aurei,  which 
had  been  expended  for  bis  use;    but,  as  to  the  other  five,  he 
could  be  obliged   to  pay  only  so  much   as  the  peculium  would 
answer;  and  from  hence  it  will  appear,  that,  if  all  the  ten  aurei, 
which  were  borrowed,   had  been  converted   by  the  slave  to  his 
master's  emolument,  the  lender  might  have  recovered  the  whol$ 
ten  from  the  master;  for  although  it  is  one  and  the  same  action, 
by  which  a  suit  is  commenced  against  a  peculium,  and  for  the  re«- 
rovery  of  what  a  slave  hath  converted  to  his  master's  use,  yet  tint 
action  carries   with  it  two  different  condemnations;  and  it  is  for 
this  reason,  that  the  judge  does  not  begin  to  make  an  estimate  of 
the  value  of  the  peculium,  till  he  has  previously  examined,  whether 


&08      THE  INSTITUTES B.  iv, 

the  whole,  or  any  part  of  the  money,  arising  from  the  slave's 
contract,  hath  been  expended  for  the  service  of  the  master :  but, 
when  th« judge  proceeds  to  the  valuation  of  the  peculium,  a  de- 
duction is  made  of  whatever  the  slave  owes  to  his  master,  or  to 
any  other  under  the  power  of  his  master,  and  the  remainder  only 
is  understood  to  be  strictly  the  peculium,  and  chargeable  with 
debts  due  to  strangers.  But  it  sometimes  happens,  that  what  one 
slave  owes  to  another,  under  the  power  of  the  same  master,  is 
not  deducted  ;  as  when  the  slave,  who  is  the  creditor,  composes  a 
part  of  his  debtor's  peculium  ;  for,  if  a  slave  is  indebted  to  his 
vicarial  slave,  this  debt  cannot  be  deducted  from  the  peculium. 

Of  the  Concurrence  of  Actions. 

V.  It  is,  nevertheless,  not  to  be  doubted,  but  that  he  who  hath 
made  a  contract  with  a  slave  at  the  command  of  the  master  of 
that  slave,  and  is  entitled  either  to  the  action  institoria  or  exerci- 
toria,  is  also  entitled  to  the  action  de  peculio  and  de  in  rent  verso ; 
but  it  would  be  highly  imprudent  in  any  party  to  relinquish  an 
action,  by  which  he  could  most  easily  recover  his  whole  demand, 
^and,  by  recurring  to  another,  reduce  himself  to  the  difficulty  of 
proving  that  the  money  he  lent  to  the  slave  was  turned  to  the  use 
of  the  master,  or  that  the  slave  is  possessed  of  a  peculium  suf- 
ficient to  answer  the  whole  debt.  He  also,  to  whom  the  action 
tributoria  is  given,  is  equally  entitled  to  the  action  de  peculio,  and 
de  in  rem  verso ;  but  it  is  expedient,  in  some  cases,  to  use  the  one, 
and  in  some  cases  the  other:  yet  it  is  frequently  most  expedient 
to  use  the  action  tributoria;  because,  in  this,  the  condition  of  the 
master  is  not  principally  regarded ;  i.  e.  there  is  no  previous  de- 
duction made  of  what  is  due  to  him,  his  title  being  esteemed  in 
the  same  light  with  that  of  other  creditors :  but,  in  the  action 
de  peculio,  the  debt  due  to  the  master  is  first  deducted,  and  he 
is  condemned  only  to  distribute  the  remainder  among  the  cre- 
ditors Again,  in  some  cases,  it  may  be  more  convenient  to  com- 
mence a  suit  by  the  action  de  peculio,  because  it  affects  the  whole 
peculium,  whereas  the  action  tributoria  regards  only  so  much  of 
it  as  hath  been  made  use  of  in  traffic ;  and  it  is  possible  that  a 
slave  may  have  trafficed  only  with  a  third,  a  fourth,  or  some 
very  small  part,  and  that  the  rest  consists  of  lands,  slaves,  or  mo- 
ney lent  at  interest.  Upon  the  whole,  therefore,  it  greatly  be- 
hoves every  man  to  chuse  that  remedy  which  may  be  most  bene- 
ficial to  him  ;  but,  if  the  creditor  of  a  slave  can  prove  a  conversion 
to  the  use  of  the  master  of  that  slave,  he  ought  most  certainly  to 
commence  his  suit  bv  the  action  de  in  rem  verso. 


^   or  JUSTINIAN:  200 


VI.  We  understand  what  Ave  have  said  concerning  a  slave  and 
*te  4na§ter  to  take  place  equally   in  regard  to  children  under 


vtio  lenr/  »  «d  JcLi&WQMU-^Jwu  fed  to 

O    f/  e  Macedonian  Senatus-Consultum. 


'Til.  But  children  are,  in  some  respects,  particularly  regarded 
by  the  Macedonian  decree  of  the  senate,  which  prohibits  money 
to  be  lent  them,  whilst  they  are  under  the  power  of  their  parents; 
for  creditors  are  not  suffered  to  bring  any  action,  either  against 
tftte  children,  even  after  they  are  emancipated,  or  against  their  pa- 
rents, who  emancipated  them.  This  was  a  caution  which  the 
senate  thought  proper  to  take,  because  young  heirs,  who  were 
loaded  with  their  debts,  contracted  for  the  support  of  luxury, 
;have  often  endeavoured,  by  private  methods,  to  take  away  the 
lives  of  their  parents. 

Of  the  direct  Action  against  the  Father  and  Master?  ^ 
'VIII.  But,  in  fine,  we  must  observe,  that  whatever  hath  beeji 
contracted  for  at  the  command  of  a  parent  or  master,  and  con^ 
verted  to  their  use,  may  be  recovered  by  a  direct  action  agains.t 
%He  father  or  master,  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  the  contract  had 
been  Originally  made  with  them.     And  it  is  likewise  certain,  that 
he  who  is  liable  to  the  action   institoria  or  exhihitoriay   may  ajsp 
be  sued  by  a  direct  action,  inasmuch  as  the  contract  is  presumed 
to  have  been  made  at  his  command. 

^n^th^q^a  JgQM  ybn^L'^l']  ei    3i   te^  r?adJp9fl*^98B»9tliO8  fit  PflS 

^fjj  io'nollibnoD  slfr  8ini  ni  ,^?or.^ot:"'?  -'.i-sioJ^^'^t  KQtWxi  ^iii  ^.ir^r 
b  euoivdiq  on  ai  s^rfJ  ^J'^HKWpt  -/!i«qj3n[/?q  ion  li  wi-ps 


n 

ni  JsiJt  ii«w  ^ 


NOXAL  actions  are  given  on  account  of  the  offences  of  slaves'; 
as  \vheh  a  slave  commits  a  theft  or  robbery,  or  does  any  other 
damage  or  injury.  "And,  when  the  master  or  oyvne,r  of  a  slave  is 
condernnerl  upon  this  account,  it  is  in  his  option  either  to  pay 

the  valuation  of  the  damage  done,  or  to  deliver  up  his  slave  as  a 

,  .         .-.    '-.,:;  ,  i  ..-;     °  .;^(;i   ill   ?6'-3»'«  ^fcff*  nddu  .J«a  A* 

amoaio  ;rijiuot  R  JaiiU  J  .  bm^  av*d  '    srri  s 


% 

^  I.  T,he  term  noxa.  denotes  the  slave,  by  whom  the  male-feasance 

was  done  ;  and,  by  the  word  noxia,  we  understand  the  malerfea- 
sance  ;  itself  be  it  of  ,  what  kind  it  will,  theft,  damage,  rapine, 
or  injury.  !3onJ  J(^uo  ^  lo  -.~)*eum  sriJ'to  ^3.  ?»fb  or 

The  Reason  of  these;  Actions.  rniwnno* 

II.  It  is  with  the  utmost  reason  allowable,  that  a  master  should 

VOL.  No.  6.  2  D 


210 THE  INSTITUTES B.IT 

deliver  the  slave,  who  is  culpable,  as  a  full  compensation  to  the 
party  injured;  for  it  was  unjust, that  it  should  be  in  the  power  of 
slaves  to  cause  their  masters  to  suffer  any  greater  damage,  than 
the  value  of  their  own  bodies  would  amount  to. 

Effect  of  the  surrender  of  the  Slave. 

III.  If  a  noxal  action  is  given  against  a  master,  he  may  free 
himself  from  it  by  delivering  his  slave  into  the  possession  of  the 
plaintiff,  in  whom  the  property  in  such  slave  will  become  abso- 
lutely vested;  but,  if  the  slave  can  pay  his  new  master  in  money 
the  value  of  the  damage,  the  slave  may  be  manumitted  by  the 
assistance  of  the  praetor,  although  his  new   master  is  ever  so 
unwilling. 

Of  the  Origin  of  these  Actions. 

IV.  Noxal  actions  are  constituted  either  by  the  laws,  or  by 
the  edict  of  the  praetor.     They  are  constituted  on  account  of  theft 
"by  the  law  of  the  twelve  tables,  and,  on  account  of  damage  inju- 
riously done,  by  virtue  of  the  law  Aquilia.    But,  on  account  of 
injuries  and  goods  taken  by  force,  they  are  constituted  by  the 
edict  of  the  praetor. 

Of  the  Object  of  the  Noxal  Action. 

V.  Every  noxal  action  follows  the  person  of  the  slave,  by  whom 
the  male-feasance  was  committed ;    but,  as  long  as  he  continues 
under  the  power  of  his  master,  his  master  only  is  liable  to  an 
action ;  and,  if  he  becomes  subject  to  a  new  master,  then  the  new- 
master  becomes  liable :    but,  if  the  slave  is  manumitted,  he  may 
be  prosecuted  by  a  direct  action  ;   for  then  the  noxce  deditio  is 
extinguished;   because  no  surrender  can  then  be  made  of  him 
by  whom  the  male-feasance  was  committed.      But,  on  the  con- 
trary, an  action,  which  was  at  first  direct,  may  afterwards  become 
noxal;   for  if  a  man,  who  is  free,  does  any  male-feasance,  and 
afterwards  becomes  a  slave,  (and  we  have  in  our  first  book  declar- 
ed in  what  cases  this  may  happen,)    then  the  action,  which  was 
before  direct,  begins  to  be  a  noxal  action  against  his  master^ 

A  Male-feasance  against  the  Master. 

VI.  Although  a  slave  commits  a  male-feasance  against  his 
master,  yet  no  action  is  given ;  for  no  obligation  can  arise  between 
a  master  an-!  his  slave,  and  therefore,  if  that  slave  passes   under 
the  power  of  another  master,  or  is  manurnitted,  no  action  can  be 
brought  either  against  him  in  jhis  own  person,  or  against  his  new- 
master  ;  from  whence  it  follows,  that  if  the  slave  of  another  should 
commit  any  male-feasance,  for  example,  against  Titius,  and  should 
afterwards  become  the  slave  of  the  same  Titius,  the  action  is  ex- 


T\  ix.  OF  JUSTINIAN,  211 

tinguished ;  for  it  is  a  maxim,  that  an  action  becomes  extinct, 
whenever  it  is  brought  into  a  state,  in  which  it  could  not  have 
had  a  commencement :  and  hence  it  is,  that  although  a  slave, 
from  whom  a  master  hath  received  damage,  should  cease  to  be 
under  the  power  of  that  master,  yet  no  action  can  afterwards  be 
given  against  such  slave;  neither  can  a  slave,  who  hath  been 
aliened  or  manumitted,  bring  any  action  against  his  late  master, 
by  whom  he  hath  been  ill  treated. 

Of  Children, 

VII.  The  ancients  indeed  admitted  this  law  of  the  forfeiture  of 
the  person  to  take  place,  even  in  cases,  in  which  their  children 
were  concerned,  whether  male  or  female :  but  the  later  ages  have 
rightly  thought,  that  such  a  rigorous  proceeding  ought,  by  all 
means,  to  be  exploded;  and  it  hath  therefore  passed  wholly  into 
disuse  :  for  who  could  suffer  a  son,  and  more  especially  a  daughter, 
to  be  delivered  up  as  a  forfeiture  to  a  stranger?  for,  in  the  case  of 
a  son,  the  punishment  of  the  father  would  be  greater,  than  that  of 
the  son ;  and,  in  the  case  of  a  daughter,  the  rules  of  modesty  for- 
bid such  a  practice.  It  hath  therefore  prevailed,  that  noxal  actions 
should  only  take  place  in  regard  to  slaves  ;  and,  in  the  books  of 
the  ancient  commentators  of  the  law,  we  find  it  often  repeated, 
that  the  sons  of  a  family  may  themselves  be  convened  for  their 
own  misdeeds. 

TITLE  IX. 
OF  DAMAGE  DONE  BY  QUADRUPEDS.    ... 

Of  the  Action  in  this  case. 

A  noxal  action  is  given  by  the  law  of  the  12  tables,  whenever 
any  damage  is  done  by  brute  animals,  through  wantonness,  fright, 
or  furiousness ;  but,  if  they  are  delivered  up  in  atonement  for 
the  damage  done,  the  defendant  must  be  discharged  from  the  ac- 
tion :  for  it  is  thus  written  in  the  law  of  the  12  tables,  "if  an  horse, 
apt  to  kick,  should  strike  with  his  foot;  or  if  an  ox,  accustomed 
to  gore,  should  wound  any  man  with  his  horns,  &c."  But  a  noxal 
action  takes  place  only  in  regard  to  those  animals,  which  act  con- 
trary to  their  nature;  for,  when  the  ferocity  of  a  beast  is  innate, 
no  action  can  be  given;  so  that,  if  a  bear  breaks  loose  from  his 
master,  and  mischief  is  done,  the  person,  to  whom  this  animal  be- 
longed cannot  be  convened  ;  for  he  ceased  to  be  the  master  as  soon 
as  the  beast  escaped.  But  it  is  here  to  be  noted,  that  the  word 
pauperies  denotes  a  damage,  by  which  no  injury  is  intended ;  for 
an  animal,  which  hath  no  reason,  cannot  be  said  to  have  committed 
an  injury.  This  is  what  relates  to  noxal  actions. 


21-2 


THE  INSTITUTES  B.  iv 


Of  the  Mdilitian  Action. 

I.  It  must  be  observed,  that  the  edict  of  the  Edile  prohibits  any 
man  to  keep  a  dog,  a  boar,  a  bear,  or  a  lion,  where  there  is  a  pub- 
lic passage  or  highway:  and,  if  this  prohibition  is  disobeyed,  and 
any  freeman  receives  hurt,  the  master  of  the  beast  may  be  con- 
demned in  whatever  sum  seems  agreeable  to  equity  in  the  opinion 
of  the  judge  ;  yet,  in  regard  to  every  other  damage,  the  condem-* 
nation  must  be  in  the  double  of  what  the  damage  amounts  to.  It 
is  here  necessary  to  inform  the  student,  that  not  only  the  Edili- 
tian  action,  but  also  an  action  for  the  damage,  called  pauperies% 
may  both  take  place  against  the  same  person ;  for,  although  actions, 
and  more  especially  those,  which  are  penal,  concur  together  on 
account  of  the  same  thing,  they  are  not  destructive  the  one  of 
another. 

TITLE  X. 

OF  AGENTS. 

Of  Law  Agents. 

ANY  man  may  commence  a  suit,  either  in  his  own  name,  or 
in  that  of  another ;  as  in  the  name  of  a  proctor,  a  tutor,  or  a  cu- 
rator: but  anciently,  one  person  could  not  sue  in  the  name  of  an- 
other, unless  in  a  cause  of  liberty,  tutelage,  or  where  a  society  was 
concerned.  It  was  afterwards  permitted  by  the  law  Hostilia, 
that  an  action  of  theft  might  be  brought  in  the  name  of  those, 
who  were  captives  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy, — or  who  were 
absent  upon  the  affairs  of  the  republic, — or  who  were  under  the 
care  of  tutors.  But,  as  it  was  found  in  later  times  to  be  highly 
inconvenient,  that  any  man  should  be  prohibited,  either  from  suing, 
or  defending  in  the  name  of  another,  it  by  degrees  became  a  prac- 
tice to  sue  by  proctors  ;  for  ill-health,  old  age,  the  necessity  of 
voyaging,  and  many  other  cases,  continually  prevent  mankind 
from  being  able  to  prosecute  their  own  affairs  in  person. 
How  the  Proctor  is  appointed. 

I.  It  is  not  necessary  to  use  any  certain  form  of  words  in  ap- 
pointing a  proctor,  nor  to  make  the  appointment  in  the  presence 
of  the  adverse  party  ;  for  it  is  generally  done  even  without  his 
knowledge  :  and  note,  that  whoever  is  employed  either  to  sue  or 
to  defend  for  another,  is  understood  to  be  a  proctor. 

How  Tutors  and  Curators  are  appointed. 

II.  We  have  already  explained  in  the  first  book  of  our  institu- 
tions, how  tutors  and  curators  may  be  appointed. 


T.  xi.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  213 

TITLE  XI. 

OF  SECURITIES. 

Of  Personal  Judgment. 

IN  taking  security,  the  ancients  pursued  a  different  method  frem 
that,  which  the  moderns  have  made  choice  of;  for  anciently,  if  a 
real  action  was  brought,  the  defendant,  or  party  in  possession,  was 
compelled  to  give  security,  to  the  end,  that,  if  he  lost  his  cause 
and  would  neither  restore  the  thing  itself,  nor  pay  the  estimation 
of  it,  the  demandant  might  be  enabled  either  to  sue  such  de- 
fendant, or  the  parties  bound  for  him ;  and  this  species  of  caution 
is  termed  judicatum  solvi :  nor  is  it  difficult  to  understand,  why 
it  is  so  called;  since  every  demandant  stipulated,  that  the  thing 
adjudged  to  him  should  be  paid.  We  have  already  observed,  that 
whoever  defended  his  own  cause,  was  obliged  to  give  security,  it 
is  therefore  with  much  greater  reason,  that  the  proctor  in  the  cause 
of  another  should  be  compelled  to  give  caution.  But,  if  a  de- 
mandant in  a  real  action  had  sued  in  his  own  name,  he  was  under 
no  necessity  of  giving  security  ;  yet,  if  he  sued  only  as  a  proctor, 
he  was  obliged  to  give  caution,  that  his  acts  would  be  ratified  by 
his  principal,  rem  ratam  dominum  habiturum  ;  for  the  danger  was. 
lest  the  client  or  party  principal  should  bring  a  fresh  suit  for  the 
same  thing:  and,  by  the  words  of  the  edict, even  tutors  and  cura- 
tors were.compellableto  give  caution,  as  well  as  proctors,  though. 
it  was  sometimes  remitted,  when  tutors,  or  curators,  were  de- 
mandants ;  and  such  was  the  practice  in  regard  to  real  actions. 

I.  The  same  rules,  which  were  observed  in  real,  obtained  also 
in  personal  actions,  in  regard  to  the  taking  security  on  the  part  of 
the  plaintiff;  and,  if  the  defendant  in  a  personal  action  proceeded 
in  another's  name,  he  was  obliged  to  give  caution  ;  for  no  one  was 
reputed  a  competent  defendant  in  the  cause  of  another,  unless 
security  was  given;  but,  whenever  any  man  was  convened  in  a 
personal  action  to  defend  his  own  cause,  he  was  not  compelled  to 
give  caution,  that  the  thing  adjudged  should  be  paid. 

New  Law, 

II.  But  at  present  we  observe  a  very  different  practice;  for,  if  a 
defendant  is  now  convened  either  in  a  real  or  personal  action,  in  his 
own  cause,he  isnotcompellable  to  give  security  for  the  payment  of 
the  estimation  of  the  suit,  but  only  for  his  own  person  ;  to  wit,  that 
he  will  remain  in  judgment  till  the  cause  is  determined  :  and  this 
security  is  sometimes  given  by  sureties;  sometimes  by  a  promise 
upon  oath,  which  is  called  a.juratory  caution  ;  and  sometimes  by 
a  simple  promise  without  an  oath,  according  to  the  quality  of  the 
person  of  the  defendant. 


214  THE  INSTITUTES  B,  ir. 

Of  the  Proctor  of  the  Plaintiff. 

III.  But,  if  a  suit  is  commenced  or  defended  by  a  proctor,  the 
proctor  of  the  plaintiff,  if  he  does  not  either^  enrol  a  mandate  of 
appointment  in  the  acts  of  court,  or  cause  his  client  to  nominate 
him  publicly,  is  obliged  to  give  security,  that  his  client  will  ratify 
his  proceeding.     The  same  rule  is  also  to  be  observed,  if  a  tutor, 
curator,  or  any  person,  to  whom  the  management  of  the  affairs  of 
others  is  entrusted,  commences  a  suit  by  a  proctor. 

Of  the  Praetor  of  the  Defendant. 

IV.  But,  when  a  party  is  convened,  if  he  is  ready  to  nominate 
a  proctor,  such  party  may  appear  in  open  court,  and  confirm  the 
nomination,  by  giving  the  caution  jitdicatumsolvi  under  the  usual 
stipulation  ;  or  he  may  appear  out  of  court,  and  become  himself 
the  surety,  that  his  proctor  will  perform  all  the  covenants  in  the 
instrument  of  caution  ;  and  whether  the  party  convened  does  this 
in  court,  or  out  of  court,  he  is  obliged  to  make  his  estate  charge^ 
able,  that  his  heirs,  as  well  as  himself,  may  be  liable  to  an  action. 
And  a  farther  security  must  likewise  be  given,  that  he  will  either 
appear  in  person  at  the  time  of  pronouncing  sentence,  or  that  his 
sureties,  in  case  of  his  non-appearance,  shall  be  bound  to  pay 
whatever  the  sentence  exacts,  if  no  appeal  is  interposed. 

Of  the  same. 

V.  When  a  defendant  does  not  give  an  appearance,  then  any 
other  person,  who  is  willing,  may  take  upon  himself  the  defence 
for  him,  and  this  may  be  done  either  in  a  real  or  personal  action, 
without  distinction,  if  the  caution  judicatum  solvi  is  entered  into 
for  the  payment  of  the  estimation  of  the  suit ;  for  no  man,  (ac- 
cording to  the  ancient  rule  already  mentioned,)  can  be  said  to  de-., 
fend  the  cause  of  another  legally,  unless  security  is  given. 

VI.  But  all  such  formalities  may  be  more  perfectly  learned  from 
the  usage  and  practice  of  courts. 

VII.  We  have  judged  it  expedient,  that  these  forms  shall  ob- 
tain, not  only  in  Constantinople,  but  also  in  all  our  other  pro- 
vinces, in  which  a  different  practice  may  have  hitherto  prevailed 
through  the  want  of  knowledge;  for  it  is  necessary,  that  all  the 
provinces  should  be  guided  by  the  example  of  the  capitol  of  our 
dominions,  and  follow  the  practice  of  our  royal  city. 


TITLE  XII. 

OF  PERPETUAL  AND  TEMPORAL  ACTIONS. 
ALL  those  actions  which  took  their  rise  from  the  law,  the  de- 
crees of  the  senate,  or  the  constitutions,  were  antiently  reputed 


*.  xi,  OF  JUSTINIAN.  215 

perpetual;  but  the  latter  emperors  have,  by  their  ordinances, 
•fixed  certain  limits  both  to  real  and  personal  actions.  Actions, 
given  by  virtue  of  the  praetor's  authority,  are  generally  limited  to 
the  space  of  one  year ;  for  such  is  the  duration  of  his  office:  but 
sometimes  the  praetorian  actions  are  made  perpetual ;  that  is, 
they  are  extended  to  the  limits  introduced  by  the  constitutions  : 
such  are  those  actions  which  the  praetor  gives  to  the  possessors  of 
goods,  and  to  others  who  hold  the  place  of  heirs.  The  action  of 
manifest  theft  is  also  perpetual,  although  it  proceeds  from  the 
mere  authority  of  the  praetor  ;  for  it  was  thought  absurd  that  this 
action  should  determine  within  the  space  of  a  year. 
Of  Actions  which  pass  to  the  Heirs. 

I.  But  all  actions  in   general,  which  either  the  law  or'  the 
praetor  gives  against  any  man,  will  not  also  be  given  against  his 
heirs ;  for  it  is  a  most  certain  rule  of  law,  that  penal  actions, 
arising  from  a  male-feasance,  will  not  lie  against  the  heir  of  an 
offender ;  as,  for  instance,  actions  of  theft,  rapine,  injury,  or  da- 
mage injuriously  done  ;  but  nevertheless  these  actions  will  pass 
to  heirs,  and  are  never  denied,  but  in  an  action  of  injury,  and  in 
other  cases  of  a  similar  nature  ;  yet  sometimes  even  an  action  of 
contract  will  not  lie  against  an  heir;  as  when  a  testator  acts 
fraudulently,  and  nothing  comes  to  the  possession  of  the  heir  by 
reason  of  the  fraud  :  but,  if  the  penal  actions,  of  which  we  have 
already  spoken,  are  once  contested  by  the  principal  parties  con- 
cerned, they  will  afterwards  pass  both  to  and  against  the  heirs  of 
such  parties. 

Of  Satisfaction  during  the  Cause. 

II.  It  remains  to  be  observed,  that,  if  the  defendant  before  sen- 
tence gives  full  satisfaction  to  the  plaintiff,  it  is  the  duty  of  the 
judge  to  dismiss  such  defendant,  although,  at  the  time  of  con- 
testation of  suit,  his  cause  was  so  bad,  that  he  deserved  to  be  con- 
demned ;  and,  upon  this  account,  it  was  anciently  a  common 
saying,  that  all  actions  were  dismissible. 


TITLE  XIII. 

OF  EXCEPTIONS. 

Principle  of  Exception. 

IT  follows,  that  we  should  treat  of  exceptions.  Exception* 
have  been  introduced  into  causes  for  the  defence  of  the  party 
cited;  for  it  often  happens,  that  a  suit,  which  in  itself  is  just, 
may  yet  become  unjust,  when  commenced  against  a  wrong 
person. 


THE  INSTITUTES.  *.  *+* 

Of  Exception  on  account  of  Fear  and  Fraud. 

I.  If  a  man,  who  is  compelled  by  fear,  or  induced  by  fraud  tfr 
mistake,  makes  a  promise  to  Titius,  for  example,  by  stipulation  ; 
yet  it  is  evident  that  he  is  bound  by  the  civil  law,  and  that  Ti- 
tius may  Irave  an  efficacious  action  ;  but  it  would  be  unjust,  that 
a  condemnation  should  follow ;  and  therefore  the  party  who  made 
such  promise  is  permitted  to  plead  exceptive  matter  in  bar  to  the 
action,  by  setting  forth,  that  the  promise  was  extorted  by  fear  or 
fraud,  or  otherwise  by  alleging  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the 
case,  whatever  they  are  ;  and  these  are  called  exceptions  infactum 
composite ;  i.  e.  exceptions  on  the  fact. 

On  account  of  Money  not  paid. 

II.  The  same  practice  prevails,  if  Sempronius,  for  example, 
causes  Titius  to  stipulate  to  repay  him  money,  which  Titius  never 
received  from  him.    It  is  certain  that  Sempronius  in  this  case 
may  bring  an  action  ;  for  Titius  is  bound  by  the  stipulation ;  yet, 
as  it  would  be  unjust  that  he  should  be  condemned  upon  that  ac- 
count, he  is  allowed  to  defend  himself  by  an  exception  pecuniae 
non  numeratcc,  i.  e.  on  account  of  money  not  paid.     But  by  our 
express  constitution  we  have  shortened  the  time  allowed  for 
bringing  this  exception,  as  we  have  already   observed  in  the 
former  book. 

Exception  of  Compact. 

III.  And  farther,  although  a  debtor  enters  into  a  compact  with 
his  creditor,  that  his  creditor  shall  not  sue  him,  yet  the  debtor 
remains  bound ;  for  obligations  are  not  to  be  wholly  dissolved  by 
a  mere  agreement :   and  therefore  an  action  in  this  form,  si  paretf 
eum  dare  oportere,  would  be  efficacious  against  the  debtor;   but, 
as  it  would  be  unjust,  that  the  debtor  should  be  condemned  to 
make  payment,  notwithstanding  the  agreement,  he  is  therefore 
permitted  to  defend  himself  by  an  exception  of  compact 

By  Oath. 

IV.  If  an  oath  is  administered  to  a  debtor  at  the  instance  of  his 
creditor,  and  such  debtor  swears,  that  nothing  is  due  from  him, 
yet  he  still  remains  obligated :  but,  as  it  would  not  be  right,  that 
the  plaintiff  should  afterwards  complain  of  perjury,  the  debtor 
may  defend  himself  by  alleging  his  own  oath  by  way  of  exception. 
Exceptions  of  this  sort  are  likewise  equally  necessary  in  real 
actions;    as  when  the  party  in  possession  takes  an  oath  at  the 
request  of  the  demandant,  and  swears,  that  the  thing  in  dispute  is 
his  own,  and  the  demandant  will  nevertheless  endeavour  to  recovet 
it:  for  although  the  demandant's  allegation  is  true;  viz.  that  the 


T.  xin.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  217 

thing  claimed  appertains  to  him;  yet  it  is  unjust,  that  the  posses- 
sor  should  be  condemned. 

Of  a  thing  formerly  adjudged. 

V.  If  a  man  hath  been  sued  either  upon  a  real  or  personal  ac- 
tion, the  obligation  nevertheless  remains ;  and  therefore,  in  strict 
law,  he  may  again  be  sued  upon  the  same  account;   but,  in  case 
of  a  second  suit,  he  may  be  relieved,  if  he  alleges  by  way  of 
exception,  that  the  cause  hath  already  been  adjudged. 

Other  exceptions. 

VI.  It  may  suffice  to  have  given  these  instances  of  exceptions 
in  general ;  but  in  how  many  and  in  what  various  cases  they  are 
necessary,  may  be  more  fully  learned  from  the  larger  books  of 
the  digests. 

First  Division. 

VII.  Some  exceptions  proceed  from  the  lawsthem  selves,  or  from 
those  regulations,  which  hold  the  place  of  laws ;  but  others  take 
their  rise  from  the  authority  of  the  praetor. 

Second  Division, 

VIII.  Some  exceptions  are  called  perpetual  and  peremptory; 
others  are  termed  temporary  and  dilatory. 

Of  Peremptory  Exceptions. 

IX.  The  perpetual  and  peremptory  are  those,  which  always 
obstruct  the  party  agent,  and  destroy  the  force  of  the  action — 
of  this  sort  is  the  exception  of  fraud,  of  fear,  and  of  compact, 
when  it  is  agreed,  that  the  money  shall  not  be  sued  for. 

Of  Dilatory. 

X.  Temporary  and  dilatory  exceptions  are  those,  which  operate 
fora  time,  and  create  delay  ;  such  is  theexception  of  an  agreement 
not  to  pursue  a  debt  within  a  certain  time,  as  within  five  years  ; 
but  at  the  expiration  of  that  time  the  creditor  may  proceed  :  and 
therefore  those,  against  whom  an  exception  of  agreement,  or  any 
other  similar  exception  can  be  objected,  must  delay  their  action, 
and  not  sue,   till  the  time  agreed  upon  is  expired ;  and  it  is  for 
this  reason,  that  those  exceptions  are  termed  dilatory ;  and  formerly 
if  the  party  agent  had  sued  within   the  time,  in  which  it  was 
agreed  notto  sue,  and  an  exception  was  interposed,  it  not  only  hin- 
dered such  parties  from  obtaining  in  that  cause,  but  it  also  dis- 
abled them  from  proceeding,  even  after  the  expiration  of  the  time 
agreed  on ;  for  they  were  reputed  to  have  lost  their  right,  by  hav* 
ing  commenced  a  temerary  suit.     But  we  have  been,  willing  to 
mitigate  this  rigour,  and  have  decreed,  that  whoever  presumes  to 
commence  a  suit  before  the  time  limited  by  the  agreement,  shall 

VOL.  I.  No.  6.  2  E 


THE  INSTITUTES B.  iv. 

be  subject  to  the  constitution  of  Zeno  concerning  those,  who  de- 
mand more  than  their  due :  and,  if  a  party  agent  breaks  in  upon 
the  time,  which  he  has  before  spontaneously  allowed,  or  contemns 
the  limits,  which  the  nature  of  some  actions  allow,  the  party  de- 
fendant, who  suffers  such  injurious  treatment,  becomes  entitled 
to  twice  the  time  before  allowed,  and, even  when  that  is  expired, 
can  not  be  obliged  to  give  an  appearance,  till  he  has  been  reim- 
bursed the  whole  of  his  expences ;  and  this  we  have  ordained  in 
terrorem,  that  all  plaintiffs  may  be  taught  to  observe  the  proper 
time  of  commencing  their  suits. 

Of  Dilatory  by  reason  of  the  Person. 

XL  Dilatory  exceptions  may  also  arise  by  reason  of  the  person 
of  the  party  suing;  such  are  those,  which  are  made  against  proc- 
tors; as  if  a  suitor  should  employ  a  soldier,  or  a  woman  to  act 
for  him  :  for  soldiers  are  not  permitted  to  appear  in  any  cause, 
even  in  behalf  of  a  father,  a  mother,  or  a  wife,  although  they  ob- 
tain the  sanction  of  an  imperial  rescript;  but  they  are  allowed  to 
act  in  their  own  affairs,  without  offending  against  military  disci- 
pline. But  we  have  put  a  stop  to  the  exceptions  of  infamy,  which 
were  formerly  made,  both  against  proctors  and  their  constituents, 
having  observed  them  to  belittle  practised,  and  fearing,  lest  by 
means  of  such  altercations,  a  disquisition  into  the  merits  of  causes 
should  be  retarded. 


TITLE  XIV. 
OF  REPLICATIONS. 

Of  the  Replication. 

SOMETIMES  an  exception,  which  -appears  at  the  first  view 
to  be  valid,  is  nevertheless  not  so;  and,  when  this  happens  there  is 
a  necessity  for  an  additional  allegation  in  aid  of  the  plaintiff,  which 
is  called  a  replication,  because  the  force  of  the  exception  is  repli- 
cated, that  is,  unfolded,  and  destroyed  by  it;  as  if  a  preditor  should 
covenant  with  his  debtor  not  to  sue  him,  and  it  should  afterwards 
be  agreed  between  them,  that  the  creditor  may  sue,  in  consequence 
of  which  agreement  the  creditor  brings  an  action,  to  which  the 
debtor  excepts,  alleging  the  agreement  pf  his  creditor  not  to  sue 
him ;  in  this  case,  the  exception  would  be  of  weight ;  for,  as  such 
an  agreement  was  entered  into,  it  remains  good,  although  a  sub- 
sequent one  was  afterwards  made  to  a  contrary  effect ;  but,  as  it 
would  be  unjust,  that  a  creditor  should  be  concluded  by  the  ex-t 
ception,  he  is  allowed  to  make  a  replication,  by  reason  of  the 
subsequent  compact. 


T.  xiv. OF  JUSTINIAN. _ 

.Of  Duplication. 

I.  It  also  sometimes  happens,  that  a  replication  at  first  appears 
to  be  concjudent,   though  it  is  not  so  in  reality  ;  and,  when  it,so 
happens,  then  another  allegation,  called  a  duplication,  must  be 
offered  In  support  of  the'defendant. 

Of  a  Triplication. 

II.  And  when  a  duplication  carries  with  it   an  appearance  of 
justice,  but  is,  upon  some  account,  injurious  to  the  party  agent, 
he  may  also,  in  his  turn,  give  another  allegation,  which  is  termed 
a  triplication. 

Of  other  Exceptions. 

III.  But  the  great  variety  of  business,  which  continually  occur% 
often  extends  the  use  of  all  these  exceptions,  much  farther,  th^ft 
we  have  mentioned;  but  of  these  a  fuller  knowledge  may  be  ob- 
tained by  a  perusal  of  the  larger  volumes  of  the  digests. 

Of  Exceptions  by  Bondsmen. 

IV.  The  exceptions,  by  which  a  debtor  may  defend  himself, 
are  generally  allowed  to  be  used  by  his  bond&men  ;  and  this  is  a 
right  practice :  for  a  demand,  made  upon  them,  is,  as  it  were,  a 
demand  upon  the  debtor  himself,  who  is  compellable  by  an  action 
of  mandate  to  pay  over  to  his  sureties  whatever  they  have  been 
obliged  to  pay  upon  his  account:  and  therefore,  if  a  creditor  hath, 
covenanted  with  his  debtor  not  to  sue  him,  the  bondsmen  of  such, 
debtor  may  be  aided  by   an  exception  of  compact,  in  the  same 
manner,  as  if  the  promise  had  been  made  expressly   to  them. 
But  there  are  some  exceptions,  which  cannot  be  made  use  of  in 
behalf  of  sureties ;  for  although,  when  a  debtor  hath  made  a  cession 
of  his  goods,  he  may  defend  himself  by  alleging  that  cession,  as 
an  exception  to  a  suit  brought  by  a  creditor,  yet  the  same  ex* 
ception  cannot  be  alleged  by  the  bondsmen  ;  and  the  reason  is 
evident:  for  whoever  demands  sureties  hath  always  this  princi- 
pally in  view,  that  he  may  be  able  to  recover  his  debt  from  those 
sureties^  in  case  of  failure  in  the  principal  debtor. 


TITLE  XV. 
OE  INTERDICTS. 

Definition. 

WE  are  now  led  to  treat  of  interdicts,  or  of  those  actions,  which 
*  supply  their  place.     Interdicts  were  certain  forms  of  words,  by 
which  the  pnetor  either  commanded  or  prohibited  something  to  be 
done ;  and  these  were  chiefly  used  when  any  contention  arose  con- 
cerning possession,  or 


220     THE  INSTITUTES E.  iv. 

First  Division. 

I.  The  first  division  of  them  is  into  prohibitory,  restoratory,  and 
exhibitory  interdicts.    The  prohibitory  are  those,  by  which  the 
praetor  prohibits  something  to  be  done,  as  when  he  forbids  force 
to  be  used  against  a  lawful  possessor;  or  against  a  person,  who 
is  burying  another,  where  he  hath  a  right ;  or  when  he  forbids  an 
edifice  to  be  raised  in  a  sacred  place,  or  hinders  a  work  from  being 
erected  in  a  public  river,  or  on  the  banks  of  it,  which  may  render 
it  less  navigable.  The  restoratory  are  those  interdicts,  by  which 
the  praetor  orders  something  to  be  restored,  as  the  possession  of 
goods  to  the  universal  successor,  who  has  been  kept  out  of  posses- 
sion by  one,  who  hath  no  right;  or  when  the  praetor  commands 
possession  to  be  restored  to  him,  who  hath  been  forcibly  ejected. 
And  the  exhibitory  interdicts  are  those,  by  which  the  praetor  com- 
mands some  exhibit  to  be  made,  as  of  a  slave,  for  example,  con- 
cerning whose  liberty  a  cause  is  depending;  or  of  a  freed-man, 
from  whom  a  patron  would  exact  the  service  due  to  him ;   or  of 
children  to  their  parent,  under  whose  power  they  are.      Some 
nevertheless  imagine,  that  interdicts  can  with  propriety  be  only 
prohibitory,  because  the  word  interdicere  signifies  to  denounce 
and  prohibit;    and  that  the  restoratory  and  exhibitory  interdicts 
might  more  properly  be  called  decrees:   yet  it  hath  obtained  by 
usage,  that  they  should  all  be  termed  interdicts,  because  they  are 
pronounced  between  two,  (inter  duos  dicunturj  the  demandant 
and  the  possessor. 

Second  Division. 

II.  The  second  division  of  interdicts  is  into  those,  which  are 
given  for  the  acquisition,  the  retention,  or  recovery  of  a  possession. 

Of  Interdicts  of  Acquisition. 

III.  An  interdict  for  the  acquisition  of  possession  is  given  to 
him  whom  the  praetor  appoints  to  be  the  possessor  of  the  goods 
of  a  deceased  person.     This  interdict  is  called  Quorum  bonorum, 
and  the  effects  of  it  are,  that  it  obliges  all  persons  who  retain 
goods  in  their  hands  as  heirs  or  possessors,  to  restore  such  goods 
to  them  to  whom  the  possession  of  them  hath  been  committed  by 
the  magistrate ;  and  note,  that  he  is  reputed  to  possess,  as  heir, 
who  thinks  and  takes  himself  so  to  be;  and  that  he  is  deemed  to 
possess,  as  possessor,  who,  without  authority,  retains  a  part,  or 
the  whole,  of  an  inheritance,  knowing  that  the  possession  does 
not  belong  to  him.    An  interdict  of  acquisition  is  so  called,  be- 
cause it  is  useful  to  him  only  who  first  endeavours  to  acquire  the 
possession;  and  therefore  this  interdict  would  be  useless  to  any 


T.  xv.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  2-21 

one  who  had  once  acquired  a  possession,  but  afterwards  lost  it. 
The  interdict  called  the  Salvian  interdict  is  also  appointed  for 
the  acquisition  of  possession  ;  and  is  used  by  the  proprietors  of 
farms,  in  order  to  acquire  the  goods  which  their  tenants  have 
pledged  and  engaged,  as  a  security  for  the  payment  of  rent. 

Of  Interdicts  of  Retention. 

IV.  The  interdicts  Uti  possidetis  and  Utrubi  have  been  intro- 
duced for  the  sake  of  obtaining  possession;  for,  when  there  is  a 
controversy  between  two  parties  concerning  property,  it  is  ne- 
cessary to  enquire  which  of  them  is  in  possession,  that  it  may  be 
known  which  of  them  ought  to  be  the  demandant;  for,  till  the 
possession  is  ascertained,  an  action  of  demand  cannot  be  insti- 
tuted ;  and  natural  reason  teaches  us,  that,  when  one  of  the  par- 
ties is  in  possession,  the  other  must,  of  course,  be  the  demandant 
in  the  suit :  but,  as  it  is  by  far  more  advantageous  to  be  the  pos- 
sessor than  the  demandant,  there  is  generally  great  contention  for 
the  possession  ;  for  although  the  possessor  is  not  in  reality  the 
true  proprietor,  yet  the  possession  will  still  remain  in  him,  if  the 
plaintiff  does  not  prove  the  thing  in  litigation  to  be  his  own  :  and 
therefore,  when  the  rights  of  parties  are  not  clear,  the  sentence  is 
always  against  the  demandant.  By  the  interdict  Uti  possidetis > 
the  possession  of  a  farm  or  house  is  contended  for;  and,  by  the 
interdict  Utrubi,  the  possession  of  things  moveable  is  disputed. 
These  interdicts  anciently  differed  much  in  their  force  and  ef- 
fects :  for,  by  the  interdict  Uti  possidetis,  that  party  who  was  in 
possession  at  the  time  of  bringing  the  interdict,  prevailed,  if  he 
had  not  obtained  the  possession  from  his  adversary  by  force, 
clandestinely,  or  precariously  ;  but  it  was  not  material  in  what 
manner  the  possessor  had  obtained  the  possession  from  any  other 
person :  and,  by  the  interdict  Utrubi,  that  party  prevailed  who 
had  been  in  possession  for  the  greatest  part  of  the  year  preceding 
the  contest,  if  he  had  not  acquired  that  possession  clandestinely, 
precariously,  or  by  force.  But  the  present  practice  is  neverthe- 
less otherwise  ;  for  the  power  of  both  interdicts  in  regard  to  pos- 
session is  now  made  equal ;  so  that  in  any  cause,  instituted  either 
for  things  moveable  or  immoveable,  that  party  prevails  who  was 
in  possession  at  the  time  of  contesting  the  suit,  if  it  is  not  made 
apparent  that  he  gained  such  possession  by  force,  by  clandestine 
means,  or  precariously. 

Of  retaining  and  acquiring  Possession. 

V.  A  man  is  regarded  as  a  possessor,  not  only  when  he  is  him- 
self in  possession,  but  also  when  any  other,  who  is  not  under  his 
power,  holds  possession  in  his  name ;  as,  for  instance,  a  farmer, 


22-2 THE  INSTITUTES B,  IT. 

or  a  tenant.  Any  person  may  also  possess,  by  means  of  those  to 
whom  he  hath  committed  the  thing  in  litigation,  either  as  a  de- 
posit or  a  loan  ;  and  this  is  what  is  meant  by  saying,  that  a  pos- 
session may  be  retained  by  any  one,  by  means  of  another,  who 
possesses  in  his  name.  It  is  moreover  held,  that  a  possession  may 
be  retained,  by  the  mere  intention  only ;  for  although  a  man  is 
neither  in  possession  himself,  nor  any  other  for  him,' but  has 
quitted  the  possession  of  certain  lands  with  an  intent  to  return  to- 
them  again,  he  shall  nevertheless  be  deemed  to  continue  in  pos- 
session. We  have  already  explained,  in  our  second  institution, 
by  what  persons  any  man  may  acquire  possession  ;  and  although 
it  may  be  retained  solo  animo,  that  is,  by  an  intention  only,  yet 
it  is  indubitable,  that  a  mere  intention  is  not  sufficient  for  the  ac- 
quisition of  possession. 

Of  the  Interdict  of  recovering. 

VI.  The  interdict  for  the  recovery  of  possession  is  generally 
made  use  of  when  any  person  hath  been  forcibly  ousted  from  the 
possession  of  his  house  or  estate ;  for  the  party  ousted  is  then  en- 
titled to  the  interdict  Unde  vit  by  which  the  intruder  is  com- 
pelled to  restore  him  to  possession,  although  he,  who  had  been 
thus  forcibly  ousted,  was  himself  in  possession  by  clandestine 
means,  by  force,  or  precariously.     But,  as  we  have  before  ob- 
served, it  is  provided,  by  the  imperial  constitutions,  that,  when- 
ever any  man  seizes  a  thing  by  force,  if  it  is  his  own,  he  shall 
lose  his  property  in  it;  and,  if  it  belongs  to  another,  he  shall  be 
compelled,  not  only  to  make  restitution,  but  also  to  pay  the  full 
value  to  the  party  who  suffered  the  force.     But  whoever  ousts 
another  of  possession  by  force,  is  likewise  subject  to  the  law  Ju- 
lia, de  vi privatay  or  de  vi  publica : — if  the  seising  or  intrusion  was 
effected  without  weapons,  then  the  offender  is  only  liable  to  the 
law  de  vi  privata ;  but  if  it  was  effected  by  an  armed  force,  he  is 
then  subject  to  the  law  de  vi  publica.    We  comprehend  not  only 
shields,  swords,  and  helmets  under  the  term  arms,  but  also  clubs 
and  stones. 

Third  Division. 

VII.  The  third  division  of  interdicts  is  into  simple  and  double 
interdicts;  the  simple  are  those,  in  which  there  is  both  a  plaintiff 
and  a  defendant;    and  of  this  sort  are  all  restoratory  and  exhibi- 
tory  interdicts:  for  the  plaintiff,  or  demandant,  is  he,  who  requires 
something  to  be  exhibited  or  restored;   and  the  defendant  is  he, 
from  whoai  the  exhibition  or  restitution  is  required.     But  of  the 
prohibitory  interdicts  some  are  simple,  some  double  ;    they  are 
•imple,  when  the  pruetor  forbids  something. to  be  done  in  a  sacred 


T.XVI.  OF  JUSTINIAN.  223 

place,  on  a  public  river,  or  upon  the  banks  of  it;  and  the  deman- 
dant is  he,  who  desires,  that  some  act  should  not  be  done,  and 
the  defendant  is  he,  who  endeavours  to  do  it.  The  interdicts 
Uti  possidetis  and  Utrubi  are  instances  of  the  double  interdicts: 
and  they  are  called  double,  because  in  these  the  condition  of  either 
litigant  is  equal,  the  one  not  being  understood  to  be  more  parti- 
cularly the  plaintiff  or  the  defendant,  than  the  other;  inasmuch 
as  each  sustains  the  part  of  both. 

VIII.  It  would  be  superfluous  at  this  day  to  speak  of  the  order 
and  ancient  effect  of  interdicts;  for,  when  judgments  are  extra- 
ordinary, (and  at  present  all  judgments  are  so,)  an  interdict  is 
rendered  unnecessary,;  and  judgments  are  therefore  now  delivered 
without  interdicts,  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  a  beneficial  action 
was  given  in  consequence  of  an  interdict. 

TITLE  XVI. 

OF  THE  PENALTIES  OF  FALSE  LITIGATION. 
Of  Penalties  in  general. 

OUIUegislators  and  magistrates  have  ever  been  careful  to  hinder 
mankind  from  entering  into  rash  and  litigious  contentions:  and 
we  also  are  studious  to  effect  the  same  purpose.  And,  that  such 
suits  may  be  the  better  prevented,  the  rashness  both  of  plaintiffs 
and  defendants  hath  been  properly  restrained,  by  pecuniary  pu- 
nishments, the  coercion  of  an  oath,  and  the  fear  of  infamy. 
Of  the  Oath  and  Penalty  of  Prosecuting. 

I.  By  virtue  of  one  of  our  constitutions,  an  oath  must  be  admi- 
nistered to  every  man,  against  whom  an  action  is  brought;  fora 
defendant  is  not  permitted  to  plead,  till  he  hath  first  sworn,  that 
he  proceeds  as  a  contradictor,  upon  a  firm  belief,  that  his  cause 
is  good.  But  actions  lie,  in  particular  cases,  for  double  and  triple 
value  against  those,  who  have  given  a  negative  issue;  as  when  a 
suit  is  commenced  on  account  of  injurious  damage,  or  for  a  legacy 
left  to  a  sacred  place,  as  a  church,  hospital,  &c.  There  are  also 
actions,  upon  which  more  than  the  simple  value  is  recoverable  at 
the  time  of  their  commencement;  as  upon  an  action  of  theft 
manifest,  which  is  for  fourfold  the  value;  and  upon  an  action  of 
theft  not  manifest,  which  lies  for  double  the  value;  because  in 
these,  as  well  as  in  some  other  cases,  the  action  is  at  first  given 
for  more  than  the  simple  value,  whether  the  defendant  denies  or 
confesses  the  charge  brought  against  him.  But  the  calumny  of 
the  plaintiff  is  also  under  restraint,  for  he  too  is  compelled  by  our 
constitution  to  swear,  that  he  did  not  commence  tht  suit  with  an 


224  THE  INSTITUTES  u.  iv. 

intention  to  calumniate ;  but  upon  a  thorough  confidence,  that 
he  had  a  good  cause  :  and,  what  is  more,  the  advocates  on  both 
sides  are  likewise  compellable  to  take  a  similar  oath,  the  substance 
of  which  is  set  forth  in  another  of  our  constitutions.  This  prac- 
tice hath  been  introduced  in  the  place  of  the  ancient  action  of 
calumny,  which  compelled  the  plaintiff  to  pay  the  tenth  part  of 
his  demand  as  a  punishment ;  but  this  action  is  now  disused  ;  and 
instead  of  it,  we  have  introduced  the  before-mentioned  oath,  and 
have  ordained,  that  every  rash  litigant,  who  hnth  failed  in  his 
proof,  shall  be  compelled  to  pay  his  adversary  the  damages  and 

costs  of  suit. 

Of  Infamy. 

II.  In  some  cases  the  parties  condemned  become  infamous,  as 
in  actions  of  theft,  rapine,  injury,  or  fraud.     The  parties  con~ 
demned  are  likewise  rendered  infamous,  in  an  action  of  tutelage, 
mandate,  or  deposit,  if  it  is  a  direct,  and  not  a  contrary  action. 
An  action  of  partnership  has  also  the  same  effect ;  for  it  is  direct 
in  regard  to  all  the  partners;  and  therefore  any  one  of  them,  wha 
is  condemned  in  such  action,  is  branded  with  infamy.     But  not 
only  those  who  have  been  condemned  in  an  action  of  theft,  rapine* 
injury,  or  fraud,  are  rendered  infamous ;  but  those  also  who  have 
bargained  to  prevent  a  criminal  prosecution;  and  this  is  a  right 
practice;  for  there  is  a  wide  difference  between  a  debtor,  on  ac- 
count of  a  crime,  and  a  debtor  upon  contract. 

Of  summoning  to  Trial. 

III.  All  actions  take  their  commencement  from  that'part  of  the 
praetor's  edict,  in  which  he  treats  de  in  jus  vocando;  that  is,  of 
calling  persons  into  judgment:  for  the  first  step  to  be  taken,  in 
all  matters  of  controversy,  is  to  cite  or  call  the  adverse  party  to 
appear  before  the  judge,  who  is  to  determine  the  cause.     And,  in 
the  same  part  of  the  edict,  the  praetor  hath  treated  parents  and 
patrons,  and  even  the  children  of  patrons  and  patronesses,  with  so 
great  a  respect,  that  he   does  not  suffer  them  to  be  called  into 
judgment  by  their  children  or  their  freedmen,  until  application 
hath  been  first  made  to  him,  and  leave  obtained;  and,  if  any  man 
presumes  to  cite  a  parent,  a  patron,  or  the  children  of  a  patron, 
without  such  previous  permission,  he  is  subject  to  a  penalty  of 
fifty  sol  id  i. 


TITLE  XVII. 

OF  THE  OFFICE  OF  JUDGE. 

Of  the  Office  of  Judge  in  general. 

IT  now  remains,  that  we  should  enquire  into  the  office  and  duty 
of  a  judge.    And  it  is  certain,  that  it  ought  to  be  his  principal 


T.  xvii. 


OF  JUSTINIAN. 


care  never  to  determine  otherwise  than  the  laws,  the  constitu- 
tions, or  the  customs  and  usages  direct. 

Of  the  noxal  Judgment. 

I.  And  therefore,  if  a  suit  is  commenced  by  a  noxal  action,  the 
judge  ought  always  to  observe  the  following  form  of  condemna- 
tion,  if  the  defendant  deserves  to  be  condemned  ;  e.  g.  "  I  con- 
demn Publius  Maevius  to  pay  Lucius  Titius  ten  aurei,  or  to  de- 
liver up  the  slave  who  did  the  damage." 

Of  real  Actions. 

II.  When  a  cause,  commenced  upon  a  real  action,  is  brought 
before  a  judge  for  his  determination,  and  he  thinks  proper  to  pro- 
nounce against  the  demandant,  the  possessor  ought  then  to  be  ac- 
quitted ;  but,  if  the  judge  thinks  it  just  to  condemn  the  possessor, 
the  party  condemned  must  be  admonished  to  restore  the  very 
thing  which  was  in  dispute,  together  with  all  its  produce.    But,  if 
the  possessor  alleges  that  he  is  unable  to  make  an  immediate  re- 
stitution, and  petitions  fora  longer  time,  without  any  seeming  in- 
tention to  frustrate  the  sentence,  he  is  to  be  indulged;  provided 
always,  that  he  gives  caution,  by  a  sufficient  bondsman,  for  the 
full  payment  of  the  condemnation  and  costs  of  suit,  if  he  should 
fail  to  make  restitution  within  the  time  appointed.  And,  if  an  in- 
heritance is  sued  for,  a  judge  ought  to  determine  just  in  the  same 
manner,  in  regard  to  the  profits,  as  he  would  in  a  suit  for  some 
particular  thing  only  ;  for,  if  the  defendant  appears  to  have  been  a 
possessor  in  mala  fide,  then  almost  the  same  reasoning  prevails  in 
both  actions  in  regard  to  the  profits,  whether  they  were  taken  by 
the  possessor,  or,  through  negligence,  not  taken  by  him  :  but  if 
the  defendant  was  a  possessor  bona  fide,  then  no  account  is  ex- 
pected, either  of  fruits  consumed,  or  of  fruits  not  gathered,  be- 
fore the  contestation  of  suit;  yet  note,  that,  from  the  time  of  con- 
testation, all  fruits  must  be  accounted  for,  whether  they  were 
gathered  and  used,  or  left  ungathered,  through  the  negligence  of 
the  possessor. 

Of  the  Action  to  exhibit. 

III.  If  a  man  proceeds  by  an  action  ad  exhibendu?n,  it  is  not 
sufficient,  that  the  defendant  should  exhibit  the  thing  in  question, 
but  he  must  also  be  answerable  for  all  profits  and  emoluments 
accruing  from  it  ;  that  the  plaintiff  may  be  in  the  same  state,  as  if 
his  property  had  been  restored  to  him  at  the  time,  when  he  first 
brought  his   action  ;    and  therefore,   if  the  possessor,  during  his 
delay  to  surrender  the  thing  in  dispute,  shall  gain  a  prescriptive 
title  to  it,  yet  such  possessor  shall  nevertheless  be  condemned  to 
restitution  ;  fpr  he  shall  not  be  allowed  to  avail  himself  of  his  own 

VOL.  I.  No.  (i  2  F 


22<J  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  iv. 

delay.  And  farther,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  judge  to  take  an  account 
of  the  profits  of  the  middle  time  :  that  is,  of  the  time  between 
contestation  and  sentence.  But,  if  the  defendant  declares,  that 
he  is  not  able  instantly  to  produce  the  thing  adjudged,  and  prays 
a  farther  time,  without  any  appearance  of  affecting  a  delay,  a 
term  ought  to  be  assigned  him,  upon  his  giving  caution  to  make 
restitution.  But,  if  he  neither  obeys  the  commands  of  the  ma- 
gistrate  in  instantly  producing  the  thing  adjudged,  nor  in  giving 
a  sufficient  caution  for  the  production  of  it  at  a  future  day,  he~ 
must  then  be  condemned  to  pay  the  full  damages,  which  the 
demandant  hath  sustained  by  not  having  the  thing  delivered  to 
him  at  the  commencement  of  the  suit. 

Partition  of  an  Inheritance. 

IV.  When  a  suit  is  commenced  by  the  action  familice  crciscun- 
dec,  for  the  partition  of  an  inheritance,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  judge 
to  decree  to  each  heir  his  respective  portion:  and,  if  the  partition 
when  made,  is  more  advantageous  to  the  one  than  to  the  other, 
then  ought  the  judge,  as  we  have  before  observed,  to  oblige  him, 
who  has  the  largest  part,  to  make  a  full  recompense  in  money  to 
his  coheir:  it  therefore  follows,  that  every  coheir,  who  hath  taken 
the  profits  of  an  inheritance  to  his  sole  use,  and  consumed  them, 
is  liable  to  be  compelled  to  make  a  restitution.    And  this  is  the 
law  not  only  when  there  are  two  heirs,  but  also  when  there  are 
many. 

Of  dividing  what  is  Common. 

V.  The  same  law  is  also  observed,  when  a  suit  is  brought  upon 
the  action  communi  dwidundo,  for  one  particular  thing  only,  it 
being  but  a  part  or  parcel  of  an.  inheritance,  as  for  example,  a 
field,  or  any  piece  of  ground,  which,  if  it  can  be  convenienly  di- 
vided, ought  to  be  adjudged  to  each  claimant  in  equal  portions; 
and,  if  the  share  of  one  is  larger  than  the  share  of  another,  the 
party,  possessing  such  large  portion,  must  be  condemned  to  make 
a  recompense  in  money.     But,  if  the  thing  sued  for  is  of  such  a 
nature,  that  it  can  not  be  divided,  as  a  slave,  or  an  horse  for  ex- 
ample, it  must  be  given  intirely  to  one  of  the  copartners,  who 
must  be  ordered  to  make  a  satisfaction  in  money  to  the  other. 

Of  determining  Boundaries. 

VI.  When  the  action  Jinium  regundorem  is  brought  for  the  de- 
termination of  boundaries,  the  judge  ought   first  to  examine, 
whether  it  is  absolutely  requisite  to  proceed  to  an  adjudication: 
but  it  is,  in  one  case,  undoubtedly  necessary ;  and  this  happens, 
whenever  it  becomes  expedient,  that  any  grounds  should  be  di- 
vided by  more  conspicuous  boundaries  than  they  formerly  were ; 


T.  xviii. OF  JUSTINIAN. .      227 

for  necessity  then  makes  it  requisite,  that  a  part  of  one  man's 
ground  should  be  adjudged  to  another,  in  which  case  it  is  incum- 
bent upon  a  judge  to  condemn  him,  whose  estate  is  enlarged,  to 
pay  an  equivalent  to  the  other,  whose  estate  is  diminished.  It  is 
also  by  virtue  of  this  action,  that  any  one  may  be  prosecuted,  who 
hath  committed  any  fraud  in  relation  to  boundaries,  by  either  re- 
moving stones,  or  cutting  down  trees,  which  supplied  the  place 
of  landmarks.  The  same  action  will  also  subject  any  man  to 
condemnation  on  account  of  contumacy,  if  he  refuses  to  suffer  his 
lands  to  be  measured  at  the  command  of  a  judge. 

Of  Adjucation. 

VII.  And  note,  that  whatever  is  adjudged  by  virtue  of  a  sen- 
tence proceeding  from  any  of  these  actions,  the  same  instantly 
becomes  the  property  of  him,  to  whom  it  was  so  adjudged. 

TITLE  XVIII. 
OF  PUBLIC  JUDGMENTS. 

Difference  from  private. 

PUBLIC  judgments  are  not  introduced  by  actions ;  nor  are  they 
in  any  thing  similar  to  the  other  judgments,  of  which  we  have  been 
treating.  They  also  differ  greatly  from  one  another  in  the  manner 
of  being  instituted  and  prosecuted. 

Etymology. 

I.  These  judgments  are  denominated  public,  or  popular,  be- 
cause, in  general,  they  may  be  sued  to  execution  by  any  of  the 
people. 

Division. 

II.  Of  these  judgments  some  are  capital,  and  others  not  capi- 
tal.    Those,  we  term  capital,  by  which  a  criminal  is  prohibited 
from  fire  and  water,  or  condemned  to  death,  to  deportation,  or  to 
the  mines.    The  other  judgments,  by  which  men  are  fined  and 
rendered  infamous,  are  public  indeed,  but  yet  not  capital. 

Examples.    Of  lese  Majesty. 

III.  The  following  laws  denounce  public  judgments.    The  law 
Julia  majestatis  extends  its  force  against  those,  who  have  been 
hardy  enough  to  undertake  any  enterprize  against  the  emperor  or 
the  republic.    The  penalty  of  this  law  is  the  loss  of  life,  and  the 
very  memory  of  the  offender  becomes  infamous  after  his  death. 

Of  Adultery. 

IV.  The  law  Julia,  which  was  made  for  the  suppression  of 
adulteries,  not  only  punishes  those  men  with  death,  who  violate 
the  marriage  bed  of  others,  but  also  those,  who  commit  acts  of 


228  THE  INSTITUTES  B.  iv. 

detestable  lewdness  with  persons  of  their  own  sex.  The  same 
law  also  inflicts  a  punishment  upon  all,  who  are  guilty  of  the  crime 
called  stuprum :  which  is  that  of  debauching  a  virgin,  or  a  widow 
of  honest  fame,  without  using  force.  The  punishment  of  this 
crime  in  persons  of  condition  is  the  confiscation  of  a  moiety  of 
their  possessions :  but  offenders  of  low  degree  undergo  a  corporal 
chastisement  with  relegation. 

Of  Assassins. 

V.  The  law  Cornelia  de  sicariis  punishes  those,  who  commit 
murder,  with  death,  and  also  those,  who  carry  weapons,  called 
tela,  with  an  intent  to  kill.     The  term  telum,  according  toCaius's 
interpretation,  commonly  signifies  an  arrow  made  to  be  shot  from 
a  bow,  but  it  is  now  used  to  denote  any  missive  weapon,  or  what- 
ever is  thrown  from  the  hand  ;  it  therefore  follows,  that  a  club,  a 
stone,  or  a  piece  of  iron,  may  be  comprehended  under  that  appel- 
lation.   The  word  telum  is  evidently  derived  from  the  Greek  ad- 
verb riyXoi/,  procul,  because  thrown  from  a  distance.    And  we  may 
trace  the  same  analogy  in  the  Greek  word  /3eXoe;  for  what  we  call 
telum,  the  Greeks  term  faXof,  from  paXsaSat  to  throw ;  and  of  this 
we  are  informed  by  Xenophon,  who  writes  thus :— "  Darts  also 
were  carried,  spears,  arrows,  slings,  and  a  multitude  of  stones" 
Assassins  and  murderers  are  called  sicarii  from  sica,  which   sig- 
nifies a  short  crooked  sword  or  ponyard.    The  same  now  also 
inflicts  a  capital  punishment  upon  those,  who  practice  odious 
arts,  or  sell  pernicious  medicaments,  occasioning  the  death  of  man- 
kind, as  well  by  poison,  as  by  magical  incantations. 

Of  Parricides. 

VI.  The  law  Pompeia  de  parricidiis  inflicts  a  new  punish- 
ment upon  those,  who  commit  parricide,  which  is  the  most  exe- 
crable of  all  crimes ;  and  by  this  law  it  is  ordained,  that  whoever, 
either  publicly  en-  privately,  hastens  he  death  of  a  parent  or  a  child, 
or  of  any  person  comprized  under  the  tie,  or  denomination,  of  a 
parent,  shall  be  committed  as  a  committer  of  parricide;  and  that 
any  one,  who  hath  advised,  or  been  privy  to  the  death  of  any  of 
these  persons,  is  also  guilty  of  parricide,  although  he  is  a  stranger, 
and  not  related  to  their  family.    A  criminal,  in  case  of  parricide, 
is  neither  put  lo  death  by  the  sword,  by  fire,  nor  by  any  other  or- 
dinary punishment;  for  the  law  directs,  that  he  shall  be  sewed  up 
in  a  kind  of  sack,  with  a  dog,  a  cock,  a  viper,  and  an  ape,  and, 
being  put  up  in  this  horrid  inclosure,  shall  be  thrown  either  into 
the  sea,  or  an  adjacent  river,  according  to  the  situation  of  the 
place,  where  the  punishment  is  inflicted  :  thus,  whilst  he  is  yet 
alive,  he  is  deprived  of  the  very  elements ;  so  that  his  living  bocjy 


T,  xvi.  OF  JUSTINIAN. 


is  denied  the  benefits  of  the  air,  and  his  dead  body  the  use  of  the 
earth.  But  if  a  man  is  guilty  of  the  murder  of  any  other  person, 
related  to  him,  either  by  cognation  or  affinity,  he  is  only  subject 
to  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the  law  Cornelia  de  sicariis.  -^ 

Of  Forgery. 

VII.  The  law  Cornelia  defalsis,  which  is  also  called  testamen* 
iaria,  punishes  any  man,  who  knowingly,  and  with  a  fraudulent 
intent,  hath  written,  signed,  dictated,  or  produced  a  false  will,  or 
any  other  instrument  :  it  also  punishes  every  one  who  hath  made, 
engraved,  or  in  any  manner  counterfeited  the  seal  of  another. 
The  punishment  inflicted  by  the  law  upon  slaves  in  these  cases  is 
death  ;  but  the  punishment  of  free  persons  is  deportation. 

Of  Force. 

VIII.  The  law  Julia,  concerning  public  and  private  force,  takes 
place  against  all  who  use  force,  whether  they  are  armed  or  un- 
armed; but,  if  proof  is  made  of  an  armed  force,  the  punishment 
is  deportation  by  that  law  ;  and,  if  the  force  was  not  accompanied 
with  arms,  the  penalty  to  be  inflicted  is  the  confiscation  of  one 
third  part  of  the  offender's  goods  :  nevertheless,  if  a  rape  is  com- 
mitted upon  a  virgin,  a  widow,  a  nun,  or  upon  any  other  person, 
both  the  ravishers  and  their  accomplices  are  all  equally  subject 
to  a  capital  punishment,  according  to  the  decision  of  our  consti- 
tution,  in  which  the  student  may  read  more  at   large  of  this 
matter. 

Of  Peculation. 

IX.  The  law  Julia  de  peculatu  punishes  those,  who  have  been 
guilty  of  theft,  in  regard  to  public  money,  or  any  thing  which  is 
sacred;  but,  if  judges  themselves,  during  the  time  of  their  acting 
as  such,  commit  a  theft  of  this  kind,  their  punishment  is  capital; 
and  the  punishment  of  all  those,  who  assist  in  such  a  theft,  or 
knowingly  receive  the  money  stolen,  is  also  capital.     But  all  other 
persons,  who  offend  against  this  law,  are  only  subject  to  de- 
portation. 

Of  Men-stealers. 

X.  The  law  Fabia  against  plagiaries  is  also  numbered  among 
public  judgments;  but,  in  consequence  of  the  imperial  constitu- 
tions,  the  offenders  against  this  law  are   sometimes  punished 
with  death,  and  sometimes  by  a  milder  punishment. 

Of  buying  Offices,  Bribery,  Monopoly,  Defalcation. 
XL  There  are  also  other  public  judgments;   such  are  the  Ju- 
lian laws  de  ambitu  (buying  offices);  repetundarum  (bribery)  ; 
de  annona  (monopoly)  ;   de  residuis  (defalcation),  which  do  not 


*30 THE  INSTITUTES B.  ir> 

punish  with  death,  but  inflict  other  punishments  upon  those  who 
offend. 

Conclusion. 

XII.  But  it  is  now  time  to  conclude  our  institutions;  and  we 
declare  it  to  be  our  intent,  that  this  brief  exposition  of  public 
judgments  should  serve  only  as  an  index,  to  give  a  general  idea 
of  that  knowledge,  which,  through  the  blessing  of  God,  may  be 
most  fully  and  particularly  obtained,  by  perusing  the  digests  with 
diligent  attention. 

BLESSED  BE  THE  MAJESTY  OF  GOD  AND  OUR 
LORD  JESUS  CHRIST. 


END  OF  THE  INSTITUTION?. 


THE 


INSTITUTIONS 


OR 


ELEMENTS  OF  JUSTINIAN, 


TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  LATIN, 


BY 


DR.  HARRIS. 


Printed  by  W.  Green  $  T.  Cfiaplin,  1,  Crane-Court ,  Fleet-Street, 

FOK   THE    PROPRIETORS,    MILITARY    CHRONICLE     AND    MILITARY    CLASSICS 

•  FFICE,    14,    CHARLOTTE-STREET,   BLOOMSBURY,    AND    TO    BE    HAD    OF 

ALL  THE   BOOKSELLERS. — 1814. 


NOV  1  7  1983 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


